Evening.
It is Thursday, March 5th,
and I called this meeting
of the South Portland City Council to order.
May I have a motion to go into executive session? So moved.
So moved by Councilor Matthews, a second
by Councilor Coleman.
Are we all in favor with the quorum that we have here?
Yes, we are. That is unanimous. Thank you. Hello.
Oh, you down
everybody.
It is Thursday, March 5th,
and I call this meeting of the South Portland City Council
to order.
Please stand if you wish to, to join me for the Pledge
of Allegiance to the republic
that is the United States. I pledge Alle
Allegiance to the flag of the United States, states,
America, and two Republic for which it stands.
One Nation under God, individual with liberty
and justice for all.
All.
Madam Clerk, may we have a roll call please?
Counselor Coleman. Here. Counselor Matthews Smith.
Counselor Pride Counselor Scott? Yes.
Counselor Walker Here.
Councilor West here. And Mayor Tipton.
Thank you very much. I'm here.
Um, before we move through our agenda here, um, I would like
to see if we have a motion for adding an agenda item
and that would be a report out
by the mayor from our executive session.
Do we have a motion? Thank you. Councilor Walker.
Do we have a second? Thank you. Councilor Matthews.
Is that unanimous? It is. Thank you so much.
The other thing that I will say is Counselor Pride is
planning to join us as soon as he can.
He, because we had to, um, switch post,
switch our meeting this week from Tuesday
to Thursday because of the weather.
Um, he had a previous commitment,
but he is going to be with us as soon as he can.
Alright, do we want to pass our minutes?
I think we do, but first we have any additions
or corrections to them.
I don't see any objections, so we'll pass the minutes
by unanimous consent.
The minutes are approved now.
I think that we will, since we've had our executive session
and we've done those little bits of work,
before we get any further, I'm going to address the item
that we just added to the agenda.
Um, fellow residents, we bring you good news.
Uh, one of the items
that we discussed in our executive session,
you could see on the agenda, was listed
as a property acquisition discussion.
That property is the property that is known now
as the Walgreens site.
I think that many of our residents would have seen
about a month or so ago that that site was put up for sale.
And at this point, the city is under contract
to purchase the site.
And so far all of the ducks seem to be in order
to allow us to ask our voters in the fall
to approve, uh, the city putting a new police station
on that site.
The area is really, if you look at the map,
the geographic center of South Portland
and we think that could make a lot of sense.
So that is the announcement
that our council brings you tonight
And we'll have more details on that, uh, posted tomorrow,
uh, on uh, social media and our website as well.
Alright, do we have any, I'm sorry,
I'm working on two different agendas.
Do we have Yes, we have petitions and communications.
Thank you Madam City Clerk. You're
Welcome. These are
the two remaining boarding committee
reports for 2025.
So we have open space acquisition committee
as well as the conservation.
The transit advisory committee did not
submit an annual report.
We will have the metro merger update, uh,
at our workshop next week.
So that information will come forward
at that time from the committee.
Thank you very much. Um, I do have one quick question.
If any members of the public would like
to see the annual reports of our boards
and committees, is
that something they can find on our website now?
Correct. So they are available in the council agenda.
They're also available on the website for every year
as part of our annual report.
There's a sub subsection for committees reports.
Thank you. Welcome. We do again, take the opportunity
to thank any residents who serve on these committees.
They do good work
and um, the annual reports are interesting.
Alright, if there's no objection from our counsel,
we're going to postpone the appointment calendar to our next
business meeting, which I'm a little thrown by.
Thursday is going to be pardon?
March 19th. March 19th. Thank you very much.
Any objections? Seeing none will postpone
by unanimous consent.
We're now going to move to our consent calendar,
but first, this is the part where we read the rules
for public comment.
Members of the public are invited to comment on any topic,
on or off the agenda during citizen discussion, part one
or part two for up to three minutes.
If you are here to speak about an item appearing on
tonight's agenda, you are encouraged to wait
until it comes up on the agenda
where you will have three minutes to speak.
If you are unable to wait, you may speak on the matter
during citizen discussion part one,
however, you will not be permitted to speak on the topic.
Again, members
who speak on the topic when it comes up on the agenda,
may not speak on the topic.
Again, during citizen discussion, part two,
all speakers are asked to state their
name and address for the record.
Thank you very much.
Um, we have two items on our consent calendar today.
Is there any counselor who wishes to move one
of those items from the count consent calendar?
I don't see anyone who does.
Alright, well we'll open up for public comment. Excuse me.
Oh, did you not read them?
Maybe you would like to read them. Thank you.
You're very welcome. Pardon me and pass
Them.
Yes, but we usually ask for comment before we pass them,
but we will read them. Thank
You. Order 1 13 25 26
Civil Service Commission
for Carly Williams, district five for a term
that expires February 28th, 2031.
Order number 1 53 25 26.
Accepting $10,300 grant
for food waste diversion from the DEP.
Both items require a majority vote.
Thank you very much.
Alright, we are going to have public comment now on either
of those items that are on the consent calendar and
after that the public comment that is broader.
So is there anyone who would like to come to the podium,
make an comment on the consent calendar items?
I don't see anyone who would like to do that.
So public comment on the consent items is now closed.
What is the wish of our counsel? Move for passage.
Thank you.
Second. Oh, and oops.
Well, we have all kinds of eager seconders.
Um, let's go with the councilor.
Matthews has moved and Councilor Walker has seconded.
Do we have a vote on our consent calendar?
All in favor of passage. Thank you.
Thank you very much. I think it's worth thanking the folks
who have made that grant or thanking
and oh, the folks seem to be the Department
of Environmental Protection.
Lots of folks there. Um,
and also thanking our resident who is going to be willing
to serve on our Civil Service Commission.
Thank you. Okay.
At this point we've reached citizen discussion part one.
That is the time that you can make public comments on an
item that is on our agenda or an item that is off.
If the item is on the agenda, we prefer
that you make the comments at that time,
and if it isn't, you can go on,
come on down right now.
Please state your name.
You don't have to give your full address.
You can say the street that you live on.
Good evening. My name is Melinda Hall
and I live on Kayla Road.
I am sharing comments from Chelsea B
of Margaret Street at her request
as she could not be here tonight.
Dear City Council members
and city manager, I sent you a letter earlier this week,
signed by 140 South Portland residents asking the city
to create a short term rent relief program in response
to the financial hardship created
by increased immigration action in our city.
I'm here tonight to make the same request in person.
The council unanimously approved a resolution on
February 3rd that acknowledges that the dramatic disruption
to daily life in South Portland resulting from the surge
caused many residents to miss work or lose business.
The effects of that disruption are ongoing, particularly
for households who have been fractured by Detainments
or who are otherwise struggling to make up the lost income.
Tens of thousands of dollars have already been raised
and distributed within South Portland
to support affected families
and to resolve pending evictions.
But we know there is significant unmet need.
Importantly, we do not know yet what March will look like
as eviction notices cannot be served until March 8th.
We are worried about families that use their savings
and resources available to them
to cover their bills in February.
And now March is due.
There are several funds in Greater Portland
and in the state working to provide rent relief.
Those groups have said publicly that they are struggling
to meet demand creating a variety of sources
for rent relief in this unprecedented moment
and one specifically
to serve South Portland residents is
appropriate and prudent.
Here's what we're asking for the creation of a program
to be funded with money already in the city's undesignated
fund balance and available
for use at the council's discretion to provide rent relief
for any family facing hardship.
The program can be phased and time limited.
For example, it could be funded with $150,000
with the provision that another $150,000 would be provided.
If the first phase of funding is exhausted,
the program could take applications through June 30th.
After those applications are processed,
any remaining money could be returned
to the Undesignated fund.
Balance. Such a program is low risk for the city,
making money already in hand
available to people who need it.
It would protect landlords from lost income
and residents from becoming unhoused.
If the money is not needed, it returns
to the undesignated fund balance.
I have two questions I would like answered if possible.
It's my understanding that the existing GA program requires
applicants to prove their financial hardship
and their inability to work.
Would it be feasible for the city
to create a parallel temporary program using the same
hardship eligibility parameters without the requirement
regarding work status?
30 seconds. What additional resources, if any,
would the city staff need in order
to create such a short term program?
Thank you for your consideration of this important issue.
Thank you very much. Thank you to Chelsea,
who you said you represented.
Good evening. My name is Emily Hanson.
This is my daughter Margo. We live on Hillside Avenue.
We're here tonight to strongly urge you
to consider the proposed rent relief program.
Since mid-January,
we have been helping a family in South Portland
who are unable to leave their home due
to fear of deportation.
It has been eye-opening to see what this family has been
through over the past few months,
and they have written a statement for me to share
with you all tonight about their experience.
The recent ice operations are terrifying.
A friend was arrested while driving home from dropping
his child off at school.
He's a dedicated, vetted worker with no criminal record
and a, an act of asylum application,
but he was taken anyway.
His children are without a head of household
and other immigrant families are afraid to send their kids
to school, including me bringing a sense of panic
and fear for my family and the community.
My wife has a five month old baby
and I'm the only one that can work and help my family out.
But I couldn't. My landlord sent us an eviction letter
because I couldn't pay my rent.
I stayed stressed with my family not sleeping at night.
While working with this family, I saw
how quickly things can unravel once the
eviction processes started.
There are legal costs, more time off work for meetings,
transportation to organize, et cetera.
Thankfully, for this family
and many others, we were able to help them get back on track
with their rent before they were evicted.
But there may be others who have fallen behind
and are at risk for eviction in March.
The moral imperative to help help these families is clear.
And this proposal would be economical,
economically beneficial for South Portland as well.
Modest financial support for those who are
behind in their rent will prevent
downstream municipal costs.
When a family becomes displaced, CLO costs don't disappear.
They shift to the city with loss of revenue
and workforce emergency shelter
or mo motel placements costing between three
and $5,000 per month per family.
There are increased utilization
of general assistance school system disruptions,
healthcare strain, higher public safety
and emergency response use and legal
and administrative costs.
This all results in much more work for the city staff.
In summary, preventing eviction
and displacement costs the city much less than responding
to it, and it's the right thing to do.
Thank you for allowing us to participate today.
We are so grateful
for the time you put into considering these important issues
in our community.
Thank you. Thank you, Margo. Thank you Margo's Mom,
Thank you.
Is there anyone else who would like
to make a public comment in this?
Our first public comment period.
Uh, good evening Counsel.
I'm Rosemary DeAngelos
and I'm here to tonight as the chair
of the Bike ped committee.
Uh, I just wanted to say in the past you have invited chairs
of committees to speak by their annual report
and to take questions from the council.
And I wanna say that, um, I would ask you to renew
that procedure because, uh,
our committee spends a great deal
of time putting together this report
and just having it brushed over
and said thank you for the reports and nothing else.
I actually canceled dinner with a friend tonight
because I thought it was important for me to be here.
So, um, I want to at least acknowledge
the members of our committee.
Uh, who are Alan Mills, Jeff Woodbury, Carl Epic,
Tex Hoer, Steve Riley, uh, previously em,
uh, Barar and Ulu,
and she has now been replaced by, uh,
Zia Pantos Anthony Grand.
And then we have, um, staff members.
And our liaison is Melissa Hutchins,
who's the Public Works director.
And I wanna give a shout out to Melissa.
I think she's somewhere either just having had a baby
or is gonna do that at any minute.
But, um, but Melissa has been an incredible support
to our committee and um,
has really assisted us in so many ways.
We also have Officer Rocco Navarro,
who is an incredible addition to our committee.
Never missing, uh, a single meeting
and always giving us an updated report on where we are with,
um, crashes that have happened in the city,
which are important to our committee.
I also want to acknowledge, uh, counselor Jess Walker,
who has been supportive.
And our meetings are Wednesday morning at seven 30
and she always appears even though Tuesday night is
your usual meeting.
So, um, there are definitely things in the,
in the report that you've received that a, um,
point out the activities
and the accomplishments of the committee.
We've worked really hard over the past year
and, uh, certainly a a a big piece
of what happened, uh, was our education day
of share the path on the Green Belt, which occurred on,
uh, August 16th.
And the primary coordinators, uh, for that were Tony Grand
and Bar, uh, bar Olu.
And they did a fabulous job.
There were many other members of the committee
who appeared on that day,
but the two of them did the primary work for that.
There were a lot of other things that our committee did
and, uh, I hope that the board will take some time
and read this very lengthy report
that I took a long time in putting together
and getting input from the rest of the committee.
Um, I did miss your announcement that, uh,
Walgreens is either considered or going to be thank you.
Uh, the spot for the police station,
which I think is fabulous.
I think that's gonna be a great location
and, um, moving it to the center
of the town I think is a very positive move.
So thank you very much.
Thank you. Thank you for the report on the report.
Is there anyone else who'd like
to make a public comment at this time?
Anyone? All right.
The first public comment period is closed. Thank you.
We're going to move. There are some questions.
Oh, yes, there are questions. Thank you.
So, um, quickly, the in order to stand, um,
it is worth more discussion in order
to stand a program like this up a
temporary rental assistance program.
Um, I'm talking to the social services director.
Uh, we don't believe that there would be, um,
additional staffing necessary, uh, to do that.
Um, uh, uh,
but I'm not sure aligning it with the GA process, um,
would be the best way to go in terms of, um, ease
for applicants, but also just kind of separating it from,
uh, that program because it's not something
that the state would provide assistance
for certainly running folks through the GA process
because they, they could be eligible for funding first
and then if they don't receive any
or all that they need, um,
there could be a separate program that's made available.
There is also the option of making a donation to,
there's a couple of different nonprofits
that are currently providing this type of assistance
that already have connections in place.
Um, and so a donation could be made to them with the proviso
that it only helps South Portland family.
So there's a couple options that council, uh, uh,
Canon will be looking at.
Uh, and going forward,
Were there any other questions that we heard?
That's it. Okay. Thank you very much.
Um, and now we can move into the workshop section
of our agenda this evening.
Are we gonna bring CDBG up first?
Um, We talked about
That. You know, it's,
I'm having a little on this one.
We, we didn't show it that way, but
It's not shown so,
but I think that's what, yeah, we said it's just
that having it not be there is throwing me.
Yep. Alright, so, um, the somewhat invisible item
is what we're going to begin with.
Do you wanna preface that, Scott?
Yes. So let me bring up the new system here.
Not preface, it's not exactly the right use of that word,
but it'll go first.
Alright. So, um, south Portland,
uh, is had been an entitlement community if I won't give the
whole history, but for CDBG.
So in other words, we used
to receive a community development block grant funds from
the federal government directly.
Um, about 20 years ago, uh, we, there was an analysis done
that if we, um, partnered with the county government,
they would actually receive more money, um,
because the population base, um, that they serve would,
would increase by including us.
And so therefore they would get more money and so would we.
Um, and so, uh, this year we're, um, expecting
to receive, uh,
$411,000 from the CDBG program.
Uh, those funds go through an initial process where, um,
both city departments
and uh, social service agencies apply for different pools
of funding that are, uh, available through CDBG
and our community development advisory committee,
the CDAC is charged
with them reviewing those funding requests
and ultimately presenting, uh,
a recommendation to the city council.
So tonight, um, we have with us, uh,
Courtney Kemp from the city's, um, the city CGBG coordinator
who will provide an overview of what the requests were,
what the recommendation was,
and ultimately counsel will be asked to, um, authorize me
to submit this work plan to the county, uh, for acceptance.
So with that, turn it over, Courtney. Thank you
Scott. Hi,
um, everybody.
Courtney Kemp, um, uh, community Development Manager
for Cumberland County and the coordinator
for the City of South Portland.
I work with the Community Development Advisory Committee
throughout the CDBG process.
Um, we start meeting in October
where we review the application
before it's released to discuss
and make sure that the CDAC does approve the application
before it's released to the public.
Um, that's released to the public in November
and, um, due back in January, um,
the CDAC will have their first meeting
to review the applications.
And at that first meeting, um, we found it to be beneficial
to come up with questions
before the open mic so that we can give all
of the applicants the fair opportunity to be able
to actually answer our questions at that open mic.
And it seems to be making sure that we're checking every box
to get every little bit of information.
Um, so after that open mic and all applicants did come
and present at that open mic meeting, which was great.
Um, we have our last meeting
to discuss the funding recommendations based on the scores.
Um, those scores are averaged out
between the seven committee members
and we start our initial based on the scoring, um,
funding highest to lowest this year.
That is how we ended up, um, the C DAC did vote
to recommend to fund on those higher scored
items for infrastructure.
Um, was the Broadway corridor of P Safety.
That's a current project that's been going on.
Um, and this will kind of finish that out.
The other project was
for the South Portland Housing Authority Hazard Towers.
They were applying for funding for, um, their furnace.
They needed some rehab throughout with a boiler
and as well as a sprinkler system.
So there was a couple different things that needed
to be upgraded within the building.
Um, for the public services is through these doors.
They're the domestic violence advocacy services
and this helps support the staff to oversee that program.
Um, greater Portland Family Promises a homeless prevention.
They work with families in South Portland,
or they're housing them in South Portland, um,
Southern Maine Agency on Aging.
This funds the Meals on Wheels program
and this, that the funding
that they receive from CDBG goes directly to food,
not staff time of any of sort.
Um, we did have two new applicants this year
was the Boys and Girls Club.
Um, this was for the afterschool transportation.
They were needing funding to, um, lease a van.
Um, there was a lot of discussion in hopes that they, the,
it would be more of a, a permanent thing for
to buy a van rather than a very, a temporary fix.
And there was a lot of conversation about that
and I think there'll be some follow up with the Boys
and Girls Club to kind of work with them.
Can they be partnering with some, maybe talking
to Yankee Ford or getting some other donations to help get
that over and then coming back again next year.
Um, and then the city of South Portland
is gonna be launching the Home Energy program
and had hoped to and getting home audits going into those
homes and advertising to work with those, um, either
landlords or homeowners
to do small energy fixes throughout their home.
And that will provide some guidance
and that the sustainability office was gonna help with.
Um, so not all projects are being recommended
to be funded, unfortunately.
There's just never enough money,
especially in the public service side of things.
Um, but the CDAC does do an amazing job
and taking time to really dive into all
of these applications and follow up.
So the recommendations are to fully fund Broadway
and um, through these stores, create a Pull
and Failing Promise and Meals on Wheels, um,
is just a little shy of their funding request.
Um, we do have a contingency plan in place
because, um,
our recommendations are based on estimates
from the previous year.
I do bring that number down just a little bit each year just
to be conservative
'cause we have noticed that it kind
of ticks down a little bit each year.
Um, so the contingency plan would, if we receive more
that would go to, um, Southern Main Agency on Aging
and the Broadway ped or the infrastructure pot.
And it would be taken from those two if they were to be,
if the money were to be less.
Thank you. Yeah.
Um, at this time, if you would not mind, I'm going
to find out if our counselors have any questions.
Absolutely. I guess
y'all don't have good, I mean, I find the groups
so interesting and so worthy and you're absolutely right.
You always wish that it could be more.
Um, I guess that, I don't know, a question would be,
well you said that you prepare questions
and you ask the groups what are like three
of those questions?
How are you, you know, just a little bit about
how you're finding out the information that leads
to your decisions as a committee. Yep.
So we review the application
and the questions typically spark from there.
The main question that we ask every single applicant,
'cause we can ask it across the board regardless
of the project, is
what happens if you don't get fully funded
and would your project still go on if
it doesn't get fully funded?
And, and would you be able to continue on if you were
to get a lesser amount?
So that's something that we ask every
applicant regardless of the project.
Um, some other ones are, we kind of dive more into
because they're a countywide, really.
Can you tell us these numbers
and how much is going directly to South Portland?
We wanna see the numbers that are serving here
with South Portland dollars.
And then a lot of questions are collaboration.
Are you working with other public services to team up
to kind of use those resources to go further?
Have you looked in every nook
and cranny for that funding source?
So those are a lot of the main questions.
Sometimes when, for certain projects, um, like one
of the questions that was asked of the Broadway was,
is there anything that you can shave off of this project so
that maybe we could give some
to the South Portland Housing Authority?
And the answer was, they are have already
dried up every well on this project.
Um, and that goes for Meals on Wheels.
What happens if we don't fund you?
Well, we're gonna have to figure something out
and it will, That's,
those are the main questions is what ifs And, um, so,
and a lot about collaboration.
So, and it it is project dependent.
So like for South Portland Housing Authority,
is this project still gonna move forward?
Yes. But the hope was to own a little bit more of
that portion of the building
with this funding source rather than trying to have
to pull from the Development Corp side of things.
So it is sometimes case by case, project by project, um,
but a lot of the questions are kind of general
that can be asked of all applicants. Hope that helps.
Yes. Um, I just think it's such it, you do such good work,
your committee does such good work
and you know, I see that some of these,
the program descriptions are so interesting
and the work is so worthy
and yet if you don't have the funding to offer
to them, you can't.
So it's difficult. Alright.
Counselors, are you sure you don't have any other questions?
Alright. Right. Well we can,
can we open this up for any public comments?
Yep. Yeah, I think we can,
they gave me this little thing so I can do stuff.
Sure. So if anyone has a public comment about this work
or any questions about the organizations, please feel free.
Oh, looks like someone does. Alright.
Thank you Rosemary D'Angelos Pleasantdale, uh, here
as the representative from Bicycle Pedestrian Committee.
And just want to say
that we've been following the application
for the Community Development block grant
for the Broadway pedestrian, um, project.
And I know Melissa has been really on
pins and needles about that.
And we're really grateful that the, that money is coming
through and we will be able
to move forward with that project.
And I think it's going to be a huge improvement
and, uh, to the city and to Broadway in general.
And, uh, the, the benefit is
that the funding really helps us be able
to move forward with this project.
So thank you.
Thank you. I thought I saw maybe something.
Oh, you're all set. Are you okay? Anyone else?
Alright, well then public comment on this item is closed
counselors, um, I'm just trying, this is, it's sort
of a workshop item yet.
We do have an action item.
I think if we, we either keep all of this in our brain box
until we get to the action
or we, um, make a motion to pull
that order up right now and vote on it now.
Make a motion to move the order Up.
Thank you very much.
Second. Alright, all in favor of that.
Alright, now, um, what would be the wish
of the council on the order?
Motion for passage? Thank you.
Second, seconded by Councilor Walker. Mr.
Councilor Matthews.
Well, as always, every year they, uh, come to us
and we appreciate, uh, everything that they approve
and everything that they pay for.
And I know that, uh, some difficult decisions are made, um,
and, uh, it's never easy to turn away,
uh, good causes.
And, uh, but I do appreciate that you come to us
and, uh, give us a report every year.
And, uh,
Thank you. Thank you
Councilor Walker. Just
Thank you, thank the committee
and, you know, just grateful that we're able
to provide some support.
Thanks. Thanks. Anyone else have any comments?
Alright, what is our vote?
Unanimous. Thank you.
We're going to authorize the city manager
to submit your annual action plan
to the Cumberland County Development Program.
Thank you. Thank you so much.
Really thank you for the work and your service,
and please thank all of your fellow committee members also.
I will. They do a fabulous job
and they're very committed to the task at hand,
so they appreciate being part of it. So thank
You. Thanks.
Alright.
On this ever moving meeting, we are going to now go back
and be in workshop mode once again.
Um, we have did, did somebody want to read that tee us up
for the next workshop?
Yes. So first, uh, workshop that the council,
I gotta go backwards, sorry.
Um, is a request from the, uh, historic preservation, uh,
committee to add 6 84 Broadway,
the central fire station location, um,
to the historic inventory.
And so tonight we have, um, our planning staff, uh, me,
Nevada, here, director to, uh, further discuss the, uh,
rationale for this request and what it means.
And then after he wraps up, I'll have a few other comments.
So, Lon, do you have a,
do you have a little clicker to
share your screen? You good to go?
I do. It's blinking, which Oh means it's installing.
We had this, it's gonna take a
second set up last night. And, uh,
Oh, did it already work on,
did it already do it on your machine?
We had CPC last night, so I had two going and it worked.
Yeah, we we did that yesterday.
Well, Mr. Manager,
while he is doing that, can I ask a question?
Are, are we gonna have a presentation
from a member of the committee?
The committee, uh, from what I understand, asked the staff
to make the presentation,
but I I I think there would be representatives here to, um,
have that discussion if, um, counsel has questions
or if they wanted to add anything.
Is that correct, Milan? They passed the
Buck. Yeah. Uh,
I believe,
and really the most
of the work in bringing this item forward has been Marin
Stevens, our community planner,
who's the liaison for the committee.
Um, we work together on the presentation.
I'm just gonna share a few slides,
but together we'll represent what the HBC's request is here.
All right. I should be, there we go.
Um, okay. Uh, it's very brief as far as
what the presentation goes because I think the council's
been through the nomination process
for the inventory a few times now.
Um, this is a recommendation
for you coming from the HPC
and I do have information on their vote at the end of this.
You established this inventory
of historic archeological resources back in 2019.
We now have 11 properties on there.
The most recent was Mahoney.
And just before that we, uh, added about a dozen
or so properties that were listed in the 2012 comp plan
that we just never got around to doing.
Um, as a quick recap on what being on the inventory means,
um, in ordinance, um, is that it opens up this pathway
for adaptive reuse projects.
Some of our historic homes in established neighborhoods,
for instance, used that when they wanted to convert to BMBs.
Uh, A BB is not normally allowed in a residential area
after reuse made that possible.
If they do, uh, design standard preservation, uh,
you can be eligible for reducing your building permit fees.
So depending on the size of the project,
that could be substantial.
If you're a private development, um, it's currently at 50%.
Counsel may recall, we had a workshop on
adjusting that permit delay process.
So we will be increasing that
to a hundred percent if it's not quite, uh, presented
to you just yet, that's where we're headed.
And then, uh, it can streamline the permit delay process
because you bypass it, you're already on the inventory,
so you just go straight to deciding whether
or not you want to do the preservation practices
and get the, uh, permit fee reduction.
We, the city provide you
with design recommendations and review the project.
Historical societies involved, the HPCs involved.
Um, and then it reinforces, uh,
potentially any applications a property owner may choose
to make, uh, for state or national designation.
So we, it doesn't compel them to do that,
but if they do, they can cite
that the city recognizes this as a resource.
Um, and that can be helpful. The additional thing,
and this is not actually, uh, in the memo that I provided
and it was afterwards, we were
sort of collecting our thoughts.
Um, I think important for the council to know,
the ordinance we have is really heavily leaning towards
incentives, opening up all those things I just mentioned
to you that really encourage applicants
to pursue preservation, um, and then educating
and providing resources to do that.
We do, however, have, uh, in our site plan standards,
the sections up at the top, a particular provision.
We have to find this provision.
Every project that comes forward is evaluated against this.
Most are not historic resources.
Um, but there is a standard,
and it does say if you have a historic
or archeological resource on the property, there has
to be a due diligence done in order
to demonstrate the project is either preserving it
or it really just can't be preserved
for very obvious reasons.
Um, and so there is a little bit
of homework that needs to be done.
At a minimum when a property has historic, uh,
archeological designation, we do have
to look at whether the property
or whether the resource could be relocated and preserved.
For instance, our historical society relocated that, uh,
that structure out there.
Um, it would be that kind of a concept.
Can we place it elsewhere and keep it in town
so people can appreciate it.
Um, it also talks about whether
or not it can be maybe not fully demolished,
but some of it retained and asked those questions
and it really puts the burden on the applicant
to demonstrate those things are not feasible.
This is in the context of a longstanding conversation about
what to do with the fire station.
Looking at these standards
and knowing what we've heard about the feasibility
of reusing the existing building, the challenges
of sea level rise and resilience on that property
and what we need to do to address that.
The operational needs of the fire department
and several other things.
This standard would not be difficult
to meet if the city did come forward, um,
and have a proposal that involved total demolition.
But we do have to go through this evaluation
and it will be on the applicant
in this case, the city's end.
If we do a central fire station rebuild there to, uh,
evaluate these standards and provide that documentation.
I think virtually all of it has, has been provided.
We, I think the planning board could make this finding
that it's not feasible
and it's not realistic to preserve it,
but this is an additional thing
that happens when you get on the inventory.
We ask the question, our councils recognize this
as a resource, what have you done to try to preserve it?
Um, and also we shouldn't forget
that there's many different things, uh, that can be done
with preservation besides keeping it,
you know, physically there.
That's the ultimate goal.
Um, but preserving components of it,
doing photo documentation, incorporating design elements
of the old building into the new building interior, um,
you know, memorials and that kind of thing,
um, a lot can be done.
So there's, there's always options
and we can be as creative as possible,
but at the end of the day, the use has to function there.
And this standard, uh, doesn't necessarily get in the way
of, you know, a future fire station
that needs to operate differently.
So you have in your packets, uh, a fact sheet
or the basis of why the, uh,
HPC is recommending this property, um,
is an image here for you to look at.
And a couple of factoids.
One I do want to call out is
that the building was constructed in 1955,
and I want to call that out just
because we've had fairly recent
conversations about permit delay.
Uh, and we had asked the council at that time, do you want
to shift the current trigger for when projects are subject
to permit delay?
Uh, you may remember that the trigger right now is,
uh, 1941.
If it's older than that, then, uh,
the property is if someone comes forward
with a redevelopment proposal that applicant's process, uh,
project or application is frozen
until we can evaluate the historic,
uh, value of that property.
So there is this cutoff in council, reinforce that date.
We did not move to, for instance, a moving target,
anything older than 50 years or anything like that.
So we kind of, for the private development side of things,
the, when private development is, uh,
held up in permit delay, the trigger there is 1941
and everything we put forward on the inventory is older than
that by some, uh, some margin.
This is the first one that is older than 1941.
And I just wanna say it's okay that the inventory
and the way your ordinance is written allows for that.
Um, the city council has full discretion to list properties
that are older than 1941 on here.
Um, but I do wanna call that out
'cause we did have that conversation.
Um, in the narrative that you have.
Uh, just providing some background, the committee went
through a, a relatively rigorous process without having a
full architectural historian on board.
Um, we looked at the society records,
we looked at the registry deeds, the planning and division
provided all the resources we had
with our building permit files,
and we spoke with, um, main historic preservation.
Uh, and ultimately it's being recommended on the basis
that it has distinctive characteristics, um,
of a type period method of construction.
That's one of the four
or five criteria that must be put forward.
And on August 19th,
you had a unanimous recommendation from the committee
to put it on, uh, the inventory like you had with Mahoney
and, and other, um, uh, properties on the list.
So I'm happy to answer questions Marin's available as well,
uh, to get into what, you know,
committee discussions and whatnot.
I believe we have members here, uh, to speak to it too.
Anything you all wanted to add? Um,
Uh, nothing specific but happy to answer any questions.
Okay. I, I'll just add in, um, just to close this up,
obviously we're seeking council guidance on whether
or not this is something you wish to do.
I would say if you clearly do not want to renovate, um,
central fire or rebuild central fire on site, um,
this probably is something good to look into
because it would offer future developers of
that property some sort of incentives to take a look at.
If, um, the idea is to still keep central fire on this site,
which, you know, at the last council meeting I heard some
talk of maybe another location,
but not from a majority of counselors,
then this probably wouldn't be great
because it would add extra steps and time
and expense, uh, to go through.
Uh, not that it would be impossible,
but, um, given the current design
that does contemplate unfortunately a full tear down
of the existing site, uh,
it would just add more time and cost.
So, uh, what you plan to have there
and where you plan to have central fire,
it should factor into, um, uh, part of your decision.
I just got a quick Question. Okay. Yes.
You can have lots of questions in
The Oh, just one quick, well, first of all, I'd like
to say it's amazing that Red Dairy Freeze has been serving
ice cream longer than this building has been now.
But, uh, so if we,
if we were to go ahead
and mock this as, is it technically a historical land site?
Is that what we're calling it?
So that there's a historic designation that needs
to be made different people can make that
a local municipality can choose to designate.
That's what's before you tonight.
What the local municipality uses
as its basis is really up to you.
So it's, your discretion is, there isn't some like, um,
other agency or
or other thing that's telling you to do this per se,
so you have to evaluate the information in the factory
and make that determination.
Um, I, I don't know if I can No,
That's fine. Answer your question. That's
fine. That's, that's fine.
I just thank you.
Other counselors, I think we're here to ask questions.
Yes. Councilor Walker.
Um, you spoke about how the burden to, um, make the case,
um, to meet the ordinance is on the applicant,
which in this case would be asked what kind of, um,
cost does, would that be in terms
of both time and financial?
Do you have like an rough estimate of that?
Uh, in my opinion,
and we have, we don't have a formal application put
forward, I have to hedge that way.
But, uh, from what I've seen in, uh, the work
that's been done on the Mahoney project
and the central fire site, there's enough there
to make the case and for the planning board to review it
and make the determination that it's in this wording.
It's not feasible to be there.
One example is our sea level rise projections
and ordinance standards for that wouldn't allow it
to be there at that elevation.
Is it cost effective to relocate that?
I guess that would be a number you haven't necessarily seen,
uh, from the design team.
You know, what would it look like if we were to take the,
um, exterior of the structure of that pro that facade, uh,
really that it's the most prominent feature.
How, how could that be integrated?
I don't think you have a number for that.
Um, maybe, uh, Craig would be a better resource to tell you
how much that might cost to fold in
to the design, where if it's even feasible.
But, uh, for a number of reasons, I think most
of these are already addressed.
Um, if not specifically stating the cost factor.
Okay. Other questions? Councillor West,
I have a question that's a little hard to say clearly,
but it's sort of, is this really art deco
or is this faux art deco?
And what are the standards for having something be historic?
I, I mean, do we have standards?
Because if this thing was built in 1955, it was
actually sort of an imitation art deco, right?
Mm-hmm. So does that meet our standards of what we want
to preserve as a historic property
under whatever standards we may have?
I, I'm not able to answer that question.
So to be listed on the inventory is really at the
full discretion of the council.
You don't have to have this analysis.
In fact, historically we've never had that.
Um, what would happen though is if you listed on the
inventory, we would go through
with a qualified architectural historian
and review the proposal and then critique.
And we've done that, for instance, with, um,
2 65 Cottage was an old nunnery
that got converted into six condo units.
Mm-hmm. When they did that redesign, the process is
that if someone wants to access the perks, permit reduction
or some of these other things, um,
and respond to this uh, standard, they have to show
that they've done as much as they can.
In that case, they evaluated the project
and they found certain things of that property were,
um, modified over time.
Uh, the columns, for instance, on the front
of it didn't really all meet the criteria.
And so in that there was a specification
of which things were meaningful
and which things needed to be preserved,
which things could be adjusted.
So to answer your question, we're not there yet.
If you wanted to recognize it
and put it on the inventory, we would then look
to see if it can be preserved at all
and if it can be preserved at all of the things that, uh,
we can preserve, do they actually qualify?
Should they be preserved?
So we need to do that next, but it all kind of starts with
Whether you wanna set us on that road. Okay. Thanks
Mayor. Yes,
sir. I'd like to hear from one of the young ladies.
I got a question for one of the young ladies.
Yes. Just introduce yourself.
Yep. Nicole Regan, I'm the current chair of the HBC.
When you guys were discussing, uh, the fire station as,
as a group, um, did everybody completely understand,
uh, the possibilities of, of that we,
what our project we have in mind for that area?
And does everybody grasp the idea that if we do mark it
as a hysterical, uh, landmark, uh, uh,
whatever we're calling it, uh, what the city would have
to go through in order to build there?
Yeah, so one of the precipitating, um, kind of things
that brought it to our attention was, um,
Craig from SMRT came
and spoke with our committee, um, very early in the process.
And there was discussion then that
there was further discussion about, um, potential changes
to the fire station when,
this was probably early in the summer,
maybe even the spring of last year.
Um, and it had been a building I believe
that had always kind of been on the radar of the committee.
Um, and so at that time we felt it was important
to have the discussion as a committee take a vote, um,
with the understanding of the permit delay process
and, you know, the changes that were being thought of.
Um, certainly not in any way just to, you know,
throw a wrench in the plans of things, but just
because we did altogether unanimously as committee feel
that it was a historic resource
that at least should be considered for, uh, preservation.
And this is, this is the way that we are able to kind
of bring that message to you all.
Alright, thank you very much.
Yes. I have a quick question.
You said be, you just said be considered for preservation.
In your mind, does preservation include a potential adaptive
reuse or is
It, when I say preservation,
I say inclusion on the inventory, um,
would be the first step in terms of the actual building?
Yeah, I think adaptive use, um, the committee's thought was,
I think there's both a his to the building,
if you read the narrative, there's a lot of kind
of local history, um, and it's really a touchstone of that.
And then also the styling of the building is very unique.
Um, it is probably not true art deco,
but in that art deco style, which was unique
for the architect at the time, um, it is kind of paired
with the armory, which is also in that, um, similar style.
And so having them together right
as you come over Casco Bay Bridge, you know, it's just,
it's really kind of the first site you see
coming into South Portland.
Um, in terms of the actual use of the building,
my interpretation of the committee's thoughts is it was less
about is it still a fire station,
but is kind of that visual aspect
that reads this fire station that reads of sort
of unique architecture for the city
or could, could those things somehow
be preserved in the future?
Thanks. Do we have other questions? Yes, counselor Scott,
I had maybe one substantive and one process question.
Um, appreciate the timeline that all of this takes in terms
of consideration and everything
that we've been talking about or maybe not I have personally
been talking about, but everybody's been talking
about for the last year plus.
Um,
It, It just seems very complicated
to make this change right now considering what's going on.
And so I think substantively, I wanted
to understand if this just kind of is the timeline
of the whole process of thinking about police and fire
and Mahoney and the work and historical considerations,
and this is sort of where we are today,
or if there is some different timeline
or consideration that this is sort of before us now.
I think you guys had recommended it in August of last year.
So just sort of some thoughts about that and,
and kind of my concern about the complication
of this designation now with everything else
that we're considering,
including what's on the agenda later tonight.
So that's one question. And then process wise,
I guess I wanted to check if this was sort of
a decision given that this is a workshop as to the finality
of this and we make this decision tonight
or we don't make it for another year
or a new council or something like that.
Mm-hmm. Um, or if this is just a discussion,
we chat about it, have recommendations go from there.
So I'm, I'm just trying to figure out what the kind of
procedural step is this evening.
Um, so again, sorry for the two questions, not
to one person.
Thank you.
Yeah, so to try to answer your first question, um,
I think, uh, yeah, our vote was in August
and I think it was just kind of a matter
of getting everything together to have the workshop.
And obviously you all have been very, very busy with lots
of different things and just kind of timing of that.
Yeah. Um, but in our minds, like we, we, you know,
made the recommendation in August
and it was just kind of going through the process
to get it all before you.
I appreciate that. Yeah. I
Just add a point to that.
So our normal process with a private developer would be
that we, we hear about the delay
and it's usually when an application triggers
and then it has to then be paused
and sent over to the HPC for a recommendation for it
to come back to eventually get to this.
Um, and so I, I think it's appropriate, for instance,
you've done it with Mahoney in the early stages
of this process before design plans came out, um,
that the council decides if it feels it needs
to be on the inventory at all
because it just means that the next
steps then are more known.
Uh, for instance, the SMR team would be able to answer
that financial question and then bolster the argument
whatever needs to be made, you know, if,
if one path is chosen or not.
So I don't think this gets in the way of anything per se,
but it does speak to where the council wants to be on that.
Um, I, I think Scott, maybe the question's for you about,
you know, process, but one thing I would just caution is
if there is a version of, of the future here
where we're not developing the fire station site, um,
it's better in my opinion
that if you're not gonna move forward with a yes,
put it on the inventory that you move forward
with a, let's just wait and see.
Because if the guidance here is that you don't want
to put it on, then, then you sell it
and we've gotta kind of scramble
to decide if you wanna put it back on.
And that just is, uh,
maybe a little bit more uncomfortable later.
Um, so it's better that we sort
of pause decision rather than just say no for sure.
Thank you. Go ahead.
Um, I'm trying to, we're still on questioning.
Am I, so I'm thinking, should I phrase this as a question?
Okay. My question is, is this what I'm about to say?
Correct. That basically
if the fire station is listed on the inventory, it does not
just by its listing prevent
building a modern new fire station.
It's basically, um, the impact is symbolic, it's advisory.
It could signal
that this council believes there's historic value,
which could imply that we would be encouraging preservation
or reuse in any plan coming forward for
developing a fire station there.
But the city council still retains full authority over our
redevelopment decisions.
Question is what I just said, correct?
Uh, yes, that's, that's correct.
Um, because a lot of,
or all of this I'm confident can be answered in a demolition
scenario with enough support
is the process is ideally designed
for a private, uh, development.
What's weird is the council is also going to be the one
that makes a decision about the scope
of the fire station redevelopment.
You could not have, uh, inventory or permit delay
or any of that stuff in your ordinances
and still choose to put forward a development plan
for the fire station that takes some
of the elements of the facade.
And, and you could hire a historical architect
and they can come up with, you could do that just
because you're the applicant and you put
that into your scope of work.
Um, so I think if you're gonna move in that direction
and you want to do that evaluation, you want
to figure out if you can preserve the facade, you want
to figure out if it can be integrated anyway, you want
to see if you can, you'll do photo documentation.
If all that stuff is what you're gonna do, um,
this listing isn't really gonna do anything.
Um, it's not gonna add burden to you.
So, um, if we had a, an applicant
and historic preservation was not on their radar at all,
that's where the protections really kick in with this.
For you all. It's, it's more additive
and uh, excuse me, it's more just kind of reinforcing
what you're already able
to do. Does
That, but yes, and my quibble it,
I I think, you know, if we were a council that said
we, our community
and our council thinks that preservation of this in the ways
that you described, that somehow paying respect
to this building is so important
that it belongs on the inventory, we would do that now.
But what you're saying is,
and also you have so much knowledge about
what is being proposed
and thought of in the way of the fire station.
Is it correct that you also believe we would do that anyway?
It sounds like that is what you're saying. Is that correct?
I don't know what council will do.
I can't guess that, but I, I think you have that interest
and that desire being on the inventory isn't the end game
being on the inventory then evaluates what could be done,
what can be done, and ask you to ask,
answer certain questions.
The choice and importantly, the thing
that it's all striving towards is
that some preservation happens.
At minimum the photos are taken
if the facade can be preserved
and it's cost effective to do that,
you do preserve that facade.
Those are choices the council will make, not this ordinance
or being listed on the inventory.
Okay. Other counselors,
questions, questions, questions?
Alright, well then let's open this up for public comment.
Thank you very much, Milan. Yep.
Ah, somebody
who knows a little something about the fire station.
Phil Silver, the fire chief.
Um, the only thing that I would say
as you deliberate over this is that obviously, you know,
we're in dire need there for a facility.
Um, we don't have another location.
It's a good location now.
Um, I understand that, you know, we have some issues
that we have to, we have to plan for.
Um, what I would ask is that you give us the direction
to either yes, you want that 100% saved up front,
and we will work with the architects to see what we can do,
or you are okay with us going forward with another plan.
We are stuck here because I
don't have that direction right now.
The direction that I took as we were going
through this process was
to build you all an 80 year firehouse at the most cost
effective way I could do it.
And that's why we are kind of here.
Um, I have said publicly in many, um, scenarios
that I love that building.
I've spent most of my adult life in it.
Um, I don't necessarily want to see it go,
but as a public administrator right now,
to give you guys an 80 year building at the most cost
effective way that place has to go.
If that is not what the council wants, then just let me know
that and I'll do it. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Um, okay.
Anyone else? Public comment. Thank you.
Uh, Peter Cullen and Richard Street, south Portland.
Uh, I am a member of the Historic Preservation Committee,
but I'm not speaking for them.
What I would like to say is, first of all,
time is not a big issue here.
You have to do the police station
before you do anything on this site.
You get plenty of time to go through a process
of evaluation for this.
Now, cost a different thing,
but I do wanna ask in the basis of the design
of the fire station
and its consideration as to whether reuse of the front
of the building makes sense.
One, are we in danger of losing our ISO one rating
the way we exist right now?
Two, do the existing condition.
Yeah. Do the existing conditions
of the building endanger the rating?
Um, is the
fire department presently deficient at any response times?
How would the new station change that?
Um, do the,
yeah, what will the, how will residents see a new set
of benefits from the fire department?
If you were talking about costs
and you're worried about, uh, abatement for reuse or,
or accessibility for reuse,
you're gonna incur those costs anyway
because you've gotta abate before you tear it down.
And, uh, I guess the case needs to be made
for really looking at the program of the fire department
in the sense of reusing what's already there.
Does the drive through characteristic
exist for all equipment?
Does it exist for just two, two large pieces of equipment?
If so, does the smaller equipment effectively get reused in
the existing bays that are there?
Um, I just think that we have a little bit of,
if you give them us a cookie, it's gonna want a glass
of milk because I don't think that the citizenry,
citizenry and taxpayers of this community
will be able to justify the investment in terms of
what the return of value is to them.
So I think real caution needs to be made as to the program
and the potential savings
of using 30, the existing building.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. Keep 'em coming
folks, if you have comments. Thank you.
Charlie Teamy,
Uh, Pleasantdale, um, I think,
think we've already answered this question.
We've neglected this building for decades.
Um, we did, uh, we made Irving fix theirs,
um, gas station up.
Um, they did a beautiful job.
And I've been waiting since I moved here for, um, this,
uh, fire station to be brought to the same level of, um,
of, um, you know, uh, production or productivity.
So in any case, um, to echo what I just heard,
uh, this community does not value this.
These things. I love that building.
I love seeing it when I crossed the bridge.
Um, but, um, you know, I guess the, uh,
the, uh, when we vote on it, uh, it's, it's a shame
that we'd have to vote, uh, wait till we vote on it to make,
uh, our voices heard.
Um, but in, in any case, uh,
that's all I have to say.
Um, to clarify it in, in my mind, it's just, uh,
we've already answered the question.
We've neglected the, the building. Thank you.
Thank you very much. More public comment on this topic.
Come on down, folks.
Thank you, Rosemary DiAngelo, Pleasantdale,
I too live in this neighborhood and, uh, love this building.
And so it seems to me, from what I'm hearing,
that there would be no harm in giving it this designation
and making further decisions about what's going
to happen later.
That's sort of how I'm hearing what, uh, what was presented.
It would seem to me that, um, we, we,
that this council could decide at a later time,
if it were going to say the, the, there,
there needs to be preservation of the frontage
and that needs to be moved someplace else.
And how much that's going to cost
or at that time determine that, that that's not feasible.
I mean, I'm hoping that it is, it might not be feasible
to be the, the fire station as it presently stands,
but it seems to me that preserving it
and giving it some designation at this point is what I hope
that this council would do.
And then, um, and then take the next step when it happens.
So thank you.
Thank you very much. Thanks.
Kathy Chapman, Beaufort Street.
Um, just a quick, I agree with, um, rose Marie.
Uh, it seems like you have nothing to lose
with giving it the historic designation and a lot to gain.
Um, and you have some time to figure it out.
The other thing is, if I remember correctly,
and I may be wrong, you can correct me, Scott, uh,
when South Portland Housing was talking about the historical
designation in their thinking of doing some housing,
they mentioned it as a perk that they would get some,
some things from doing that.
So it might, so you can correct me, Scott, if
that's not the case, and if so, maybe that would be a,
a good thing to do.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. I thought I saw someone else. Okay.
We have cast of characters,
John Panty Beach Street.
Uh, I agree with the previous two speakers.
It seems to me it is a historical building.
And so really you're just being asked to, uh, say
that it is what it is.
Um, and saying what it is is not biasing.
What happens to it.
If it, if it needs to be demolished, then
that's still on the table.
It can be demolished.
Uh, what this designation does is, is say, look,
before you demolish it, think twice.
This is a historical building.
Uh, so it, again, agreeing with the previous two speakers,
there's very little cost to putting it on the list.
And the gain you get is the recognition
that this is a historical building
and we should think twice about wrecking it.
Once it's gone, you can't bring it back. Thank you.
Anyone else? Shapiro,
Lauren Shapiro, Deek Street.
Has the committee ever asked the fire station
to be included on the preservation list before
or is this the first time I've heard there was a library ask
at some point in the past?
Was the fire station included in that ask as well?
It is shocking. The fire station is not already
on the preservation list.
Just because the bill does not proceed 1941 doesn't mean
it's not his historical to our city.
South Portland has very few relics like this one.
How many other builds around our city have such
stature and beauty?
The build is as bold
and attractive as all the closed elementary schools
that have been repurposed as housing.
And they remain part of what makes our community charming.
Let's not regret this decision. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Does anyone else wanna make
a comment on this topic?
I don't see anyone. Nope. Nope. Public comments closed.
Alright, counselors, some questions. Questions.
We have questions and then we get to have a bit of a chat.
Okay. So, um, chief
and Craig, I think, uh, some of these are for you.
The first questions in terms of, um, are we at risk
of losing our ISO one rating
and um, are the existing conditions, anything
that threatens that rating?
Uh, Phil Silverberg, the fire chief, IISO,
there's a number of categories that they rate
And excuse me, chief, You're gonna tell us.
What ISO is thank, uh, insurance services organization.
It's what sets your insurance rate.
And so fire departments are rated, we're class one,
we're the only one in the state that's class one right now.
Um, a lot of that has to do with our water supply,
our pump capacity, our training hours,
our fire prevention program, uh, the equipment
that we carry on their trucks.
Um, our distribution
of stations right now, uh, plays into that.
I don't believe that there is a, a rating category for the,
for the status of your facility
or the condition of your facility.
So the station itself, I don't believe would, um,
risk us losing ISO one.
All of the other factors probably would.
Um, are we deficient on response times right now?
I think was a question. No, I don't believe that we are.
Um, I think we're well within industry standards when we,
um, filter out building fires only relative to all
of the calls for service that we do.
Um, would a new set of benefits from the fire station exist?
I'm not a hundred percent sure how to answer that.
All I can say is that the building now is, um,
markedly deficient, um, based on industry standards.
Um, it does not meet safety requirements.
Um, there was a question about the drive
through bays the best practice to have drive through bays.
Um, and so that's why we have designed it that way.
Um, the station currently was best practice in 1955.
Best practices change and so we're trying to adapt to that.
Um, I think that was it.
Um, there's a question about the housing authority taking
advantage of tax credits.
That was a good question. So the housing authority had
talked about taking advantage of some historic tax credits
that might be available for them, uh, at Mahoney in order
to renovate that into housing.
Um, because they would be doing that essentially as part
of their for-profit arm.
They could benefit from tax credits
where the city doesn't pay taxes,
tax credits aren't available and don't benefit us.
So there's no real way for us to take advantage of those.
Um, the,
there was a question about ha I guess it's a question
for staff or the committee.
Um, has the this, um, facility been requested
to be designated on the historic inventory
before and has the library?
Um, to my knowledge, the, uh,
fire station had not been previously until our conversation.
Um, with that being said
that this process hasn't actually come up very often
for the HPC.
Um, we've been kind of getting our feet wet
and ramping up to it since that original,
I believe there was, um, two properties added
to the inventory at the time of the ordinance
and then another big batch and then Mahoney.
Um, at the time that we discussed the fire station, um,
after speaking with, for Craig's visit to our committee,
we did at that time discussion vote on the library as well.
Um, kind of in the context of once it became, there was talk
of the library potentially also
being part of the Mahoney project.
Um, at the time there was feeling among some
of the committee members that kind of going
for both might have been too big of an ask.
And so sort of thinking about prioritizing which
of the buildings, um, the committee as a whole, um,
felt had more historical value
or kind of had a stronger case.
And so, um, I don't remember the exact vote,
but the decision was made not to go forward
with nominating the library into once again unanimously
to proceed with nominating the fire station.
Sorry, can you just state that again?
The decision was to pursue
the library, not the fire station. Vice
Versa. We took two votes.
We took separate votes on the bullet,
but kind of the conversation was thinking about like the two
of them in the greater context and also Mahoney.
Um, and at the time it did not pass to put, um,
to ask to put the library on the inventory.
Sorry, you're saying just this last year of this
Discuss? Yes, correct.
Yes, yes, yes.
So prior to that it had been, um, some, some older,
older sites, um, batch of houses, Mahoney,
and these were the two that we were considering this past
year, 2025.
May I ask a follow up or is that not appropriate at
This time? Yes. Um,
no, I just wait.
Yes, I think if you have a question you should ask it.
Sorry, is is there, I know Well just, okay.
She can as part of our discussion,
but if all the questions,
What I am having a little,
you are not really making public comment right now.
You're kind of a presenter.
So if she's kind of a presenter,
may the counselor ask questions. Yeah,
Well, has, has Scott had all the
public questions answered?
Yep. Okay then yeah, we can have a discussion. Thank
You. Yeah, I can wait
until the
discussion if that's appropriate.
Yeah, well this is discussion so go ahead. No,
Okay. You're right.
I closed public comment.
Sorry, a little bit of a moment there.
Alright, so it is discussion. Please ask your question.
Thank you and appreciate the process.
Uh, is there a sort of historic inventory
or larger plan from the HPC across South Portland similar
to like the open space plan on historic preservation
buildings and apologies I should know this, but
I don't. No, absolutely.
Um, yeah, so that was actually one
of our goals for that.
We submitted, I guess February
of last year was over this year to identify a list
of properties that we would
start bringing forward to the council.
Um, just to kind of increase the momentum on that.
Uh, so we have identified that list of properties
and we are kind of narrowing it down and um,
because each, each property that comes up for a nomination,
you know, there's a bit of research
that needs to go into each one.
So we do have a sort of a list for ourselves
and there's a, um, a couple
that we have narrowed it down to.
And we've also been trying to work
with property owners as well.
'cause we do believe, um,
for private property it's important that they're on board.
Um, so with some of the kind of our top tier properties,
we're in that process right now of trying to make sure
that everyone would be okay with the nomination.
Um, but yes, we have a list.
I think it's about 10 to 12 that we kind of have,
have our eye on and we're working on that process currently.
Thank you. Okay.
Now we just need to figure out where we are in the
meeting and thank you very much.
Scott, do you feel like the questions were answered? Yes.
You called the chief to answer a question,
then we got another.
Oh, okay. So we're now discussing Counselor Matthews,
you'd like to say something?
Uh, so when I first heard that, uh,
they were gonna get rid of the face of the building,
I made it perfectly clear to a lot of people.
I wasn't a happy camper, including Mr. Piper.
Um, but uh, as the chief alluded
to just a little while ago, he was tasked
with bringing a financially responsible new fire station
to the city of South Paul and not to bleed the citizens.
And lately that's all we seem to want to do,
but I think that we need to hear from Craig
to tell us, you know, the cost, possible cost distance
of keeping that phase face somehow
with the new building versus not keeping that face.
I mean, because basically that face is going
to be just a wall, it won't be part of the new
fire station is what I'm told.
If they were able to keep it, it won't be part
of the new fire station.
That's correct. Come on down Mr. Piper.
And, and it would be helpful to just remind folks too
that we have reimagined other scenarios.
So this isn't the only option that we're looking at.
There have been other scenarios
and they both have significant
issues and it might be helpful.
They're just refresh folks as to why those,
those weren't the preferred options maybe. Sure.
And then, and before you also, just to remind counsel,
often our workshops, we're trying to give some guidance back
to staff here.
We're not, it's us.
We're being asked, is it our wish
to add this to the inventory?
So just that reminder. Alright, Craig, you're on. Thank you.
Uh, yeah, without presenting the full fire station,
there's been a lot of work
and a lot of studies, sorry, Craig Piper,
SMRT architect, but also a resident of South Portland.
Um, I guess the, the specific question,
there has not been an ask
or a study to find the cost
of leaving a portion of the building.
If, if this building is listed,
we'll follow those provisions
and evaluate all the things that Milan had mentioned.
And actually I support that as a resident.
I think that's not a bad thing that we do our due diligence
and look at all the components of the project.
So it's hard to ask that answer that question.
You know, the question of moving the building
or moving a portion of the building prior to restoring it
as well is a significant cost
that we haven't planned for date.
So those are things that will add to the project cost.
But if it's in the spirit of meeting the goals of
historic preservation that maybe this council would like to
proceed with, it's setting the example
for other developments in the city.
So I'd like to think of our project should follow the path
of other historic projects in the city.
So I guess
that was more on the personal
side than the professional side.
But, um, the
Orientation of the Broadway and Antho Street
and the way that trucks are accessed
and entered the building's primary location
and why the, the access drives are facing Broadway
and the chief certainly can back me up, is
that's the best path to get to the east side
of town versus going up antho.
So the building in order to provide the new fire trucks,
good access to Broadway is in the wrong place.
So if we had plenty of space and could pick up the building
and move it and preserve it, that would be great,
but it would cost a lot.
That's our big dilemma right now is the building is in the,
the most prominent location to access Broadway.
So you say, I just wanna make sure I'm clear.
You said significant costs?
Yes. Anything you Were significant
Preservation, restoration, relocation is added cost to
what we have today in our proposal.
And what's our current proposal?
Dollar amount. Mm-hmm.
Um, I have it in my computer over there.
I don't wanna throw the number out,
but 31.5 million. Thank you.
So you're adding significant Construction costs
Total. So you're talking about adding
cost
significant, not, that's not total
Cost. That it,
that's the construction cost number? Correct.
Okay. So you're adding significant cost to 31.5 million
Depending on the solution of the preservation going
through the process to evaluate elements to save
or preserve the cost could be very significant
or it could be insignificant if it's preserving the history
through photography on the project within the entry lobbies.
Those sorts of things may not be a, a big lift
and something, our guiding principles talk about
respecting the past.
So incorporating the history of the fire station
was always our plan.
It's just, is it the building or is it the department?
The fire station's history at that site.
There's lots of elements of the history that we are hoping
to preserve in different elements.
I just wanted to make sure that it was clear
that the fire chief was doing what he was told
by bringing us forward a financially responsible villain.
Yes. Alright, Thanks.
Okay. I think our city manager has
a question for you, Craig.
Sorry Craig, if you wouldn't mind,
Just, I think it'd be helpful to council know for you
to review other options if this gets,
doesn't know the inventory.
Is that additional time and cost for SMRT
and ultimately for the city
and does it put in jeopardy in November referendum?
So, Uh, first question would be
starting the design with the direction,
I think the chief mentioned getting the direction
and going in that direction is not additional service
or different additional costs,
it's just establishing the cost we're moving forward.
So I don't think there's additional
work that needs to be done.
We just need the direction of the council.
We made, we would have to do some, uh,
refocused on telling the story of how we got
to our decision, which is not a big lift at all.
And understand all the options we have explored
of keeping it as an entity not for fire use.
We've studied an entity of keeping the part
of the building for fire use.
Um, we have all of those, um, options
that we certainly have already done talk through
the cost implications of all those.
But ultimately they come down to the, um, the, the,
the chief's task of getting within five minutes
of the fire station to parts of the, of,
of the east side of town.
And that's the driver of our fire station.
So I don't know if that did you answered
Do So adding it
to historic designation then isn't gonna
add any cost or time.
Nothing new for you to review or present?
We have, we have to go through the process for
what planning is required
and if historic designation is one of those items.
That's part of our scope of services.
But I, I guess what I'm saying is if it's not right now
and if it gets added because it's designated, then that's,
is that, or is that not extra work for you?
Am I gonna see a bill for that from SMRT?
Thank you. So the
new construction of the fire station,
substantial renovation, it's going to come
to the planning board for site plan review.
We have to do that when the planning board has
to make a finding of approval for site plan review.
It needs that standard m it talks about historic
preservation, whether it's on the inventory or not.
We ask that question and the applicant
has to provide a response.
The response is those things that were on the page earlier.
So I think what's in his scope of work, what he has
to deliver is an application to the planning board
that answers all of our standards.
That the thing
that's different is if you put it on the inventory
and expect to see certain things done
and you are willing to pay for them.
The cost is determined to be insignificant for X, Y, and Z.
Maybe we can't do the relocation,
but we can do this, that, and the other.
Then the ordinance is having its effect.
It's asking the applicant to look
and see how much it can do, what is a reasonable thing
to take on and then deliver that.
Um, and then the planning board will have to take that in.
So answering those,
I guess my question, answering the question, have we
already done that or will we need to do that?
Uh, if, if if it's designated as on the historic inventory?
Have we looked at these other options of incorporating
I I'm trying not to make this hard question.
I I feel like it's pretty straightforward. I
So do I having seen the presentation about the
potential new fire station?
I I agree. We have the studies,
it's just there's a nuance.
I don't know which way we would be exploring.
We have all the studies.
If, if, if the council says we are gonna keep that building,
we're ready to go with that direction,
but that's a higher cost project than we identified now.
And so SM rts costs are higher
because it's a higher cost project to get
through the system, if that helps.
Thank you. Maybe fine, fine tune that. And
Does it delay at all though November still?
Yes, because remember if Counsel wants to do
Y Yes.
Um, because our,
I think we talked about we're not designing the full project
before the November.
We're trying to get to a number
that we feel we can build the project for.
So that would be ready for the, um,
referend to have a,
a solid construction number to go to the voters.
Awesome. Okay. Counselor Scott, you have a question?
A comment, a decision
In all three?
Um, I, I think what I'm challenged by is
that there are a lot of different issues that are sort
of conflating into this topic of a designation.
And when I try to think about the issue
and the question that is specifically
before us as to whether
or not this building should be designated
for historical purposes, I probably would say yes.
That sounds great. I'm all for that.
I think that if this were to be a private developer,
even a city council in some future date,
that sounds like a good idea.
We're in the midst of a maelstrom of trying to figure out
what to do with police and fire and Mahoney
and all of these other facilities across our city
and tax increases.
And there's just a lot of stuff going on.
And I don't know that it makes total sense for us
to create additional bureaucracy for ourselves to go through
as we redevelop a facility that we currently own.
So my concern is that we are dealing with an issue
that in the vacuum of the world would be easy to decide.
And I don't think it's easy to decide
and I think that it's just doesn't make sense for us
to decide that today.
So I I am not a no, I'm definitely not a yes right now.
I think it's a decision that maybe we proceed with
and six months when we know what we're doing here.
Um, so that's my sort of general thought.
And I think the questions that have been asked about sort of
what are the costs to proceed through this,
what are the costs of the facilities
or lots of great questions
and those should be addressed sort of in those topics.
But I think we're kind of mixing a lot of questions
and issues and I, I really,
although I again appreciate the historic designation
arguments, I just think that it's not sort
of the right time right now.
And I really think that it would be better done as sort
of a more kind of comprehensive view view of the city
and buildings to go onto the preservation designation
and that we should really move on to discussing
police fire Mahoney as I think some
of the future workshop discussion items are.
So, sorry, I don't know if there were any
comments. Well, thank distinctions,
Scott, there's going from me.
There'll be, um, a chance at interpretation for the purposes
of this workshop at this workshop in this moment.
You are not advocating
to put the current fire station on the inventory.
I am not advocating to do that now.
Okay. Process
Wise, I don't know if my saying no
makes a difference than my saying table, maybe pause.
I, there is nothing that I know of
that prevents us from ever having this discussion again.
But what we're focusing on is right now
what are people having to say? Thank
You. That's correct.
Thank you. Councilor Walker, I have a
Question, um, based on, on the conversation
that the two of you just had.
So my concern is if we say, okay, pause, let's wait,
does that then not give SMRT
and the fire chief the direction they need to get to
that number that we need to put this on the referendum?
'cause if we say yeah, we may designate it sometime in the
future, that leaves them, to me,
that leaves them in the ambiguous spot they're in right now.
Am I correct in that? No, I'm not. Okay,
That's fine. Can I, can
I make a comment please?
Um, I mean I think the last thing
that the planning director said when he was giving his
original or when the original presentation was happening
about how putting this on the registry doesn't prevent us
from tell, from giving the direction that we want
to see historical reuse
or some kind of plan to do exactly that.
Like we, we can still direct, you know, regardless
of whether this is on the, we can decide what we wanna do
with it, it's our building, right?
Um, and so I sort of come from, uh,
to it from the same angle that counselor Scott does.
I feel like, you know, if, if we knew for sure,
and I don't, I, I'm not advocating for this,
this is not an idea that I really wanna pursue,
but if we knew for sure that we were gonna get sell this
to a private developer, I'd be all
for putting on the horse historical, um, registry.
'cause I want, I'd want any private developer
to certainly have to go through that process.
Now, going through that process doesn't mean they have to
preserve, I mean, they can
and there's a benefit to preservation
for them, but they don't have to.
And so even if we put it on the re um, the registry now, um,
you know, we don't have to preserve it.
If we leave it off of the registry,
we don't have to not preserve it.
We can make those decisions independent
of whether we put it in on the historical register or not.
So I am, I know that's a double ni negative,
so I'm sorry about that, what we were following,
but they're mutually exclusive questions.
The, the historical registry does not mean we can't ask
those questions and direct, um,
that it look more like the fire station that we have today.
We can certainly make that direction.
And in some ways I feel like I wish these, um,
workshops were in the reverse order mm-hmm.
Because during the second workshop,
I feel like we're gonna have the
opportunity to give that direction.
Um, so yeah, for, for me, I, I'm kind of
with Councillor Scott on this.
I I don't want to add the, the delays in renovation in, um,
the delays that could be added
by putting this on the register.
If we're just keeping the building
and we're giving direction
and we decide in the end that it's just too much money
to keep it as it is.
You know, we are, we're already a deliberative body.
We're, we're going to deliberate on all these things.
We're gonna talk hopefully in the next workshop
about some of these things.
Um, and so I,
it is not like we're a developer who's gonna rush
to do whatever.
And so that this was meant to give developers pause
and I think this presentation has given us
pause and I think that's enough.
Um, I, I am happy to take into account the things
that I learned from reading the, um,
the materials presented today.
And so, you know, that,
that definitely influences my thoughts
about the next workshop.
Um, but it doesn't necessarily think
because I, I don't think we're gonna let
this building go anywhere.
So I don't see the need to add the bureaucracy.
I, I'd like to hear from you Counselor Matthews,
but I'm also wondering, having heard this much,
if there is any counselor here tonight
who feels they're going to advocate strongly
for putting this on the inventory tonight,
because if there isn't, we're kind
of at the conclusion of the workshop.
I, I disagree. You disagree? Yeah.
Alright, so you'd like to hear, so Counselor Matthews,
you wanted to say something and
or maybe Councilor West, do you wanna say something?
Mine's real quick. I agree
with councilor uh, Scott and Pride.
Alright, that was quick. Thank you. Counselor West.
I also agree with councilor, with the other councilors
and with the planning director that the thing
to do is to, to defer it.
I think we have the ability tonight, uh, to ask
that this come back in a year.
It may be moot, but it may be that we need
to consider it in a year.
And just as You're, so we're, we're in effect.
We're just deferring an action tonight
to reconsider it a year from now.
And the reason I say that is
that's the time we'll be through an election.
We'll see what we're looking at.
Uh, the answer may be clear or it may be less clear,
but I do think we all agree
that this building is an interesting
and historic building that has a lot
of character or to a community.
We want to be careful of it.
It may be that we decide to do something different
and I don't want to have additional steps in the review if
that's what the majority of the council is gonna decide.
It may be that the voters decide something,
but it also may be that a year from now we have our building
and we need, and it's appropriate to think about it.
Mm-hmm.
So if this were a regular business meeting
and this was an agenda item
and it sounds like you would be going for postpone
to a date certain, we don't have to do it that way.
I hear the postpone.
It sounds like most of the counselors are going
to be in agreement on that.
I'm not sure if we need to say a year
or if maybe there we're going to see reason to do it sooner,
but if we do we do
Procedurally can we just put it back on the workshop items
to be reviewed list
and then when we're ready we can have them have the um,
well we can put it back on the workshop calendar.
Agreed.
Well does. Okay. Both of you have questions.
Councilor Walker. So
My big concern with not making a decision is,
is, is keeping this maelstrom
as I think you very aptly put it, um,
in a very amorphous state.
And so I, I don't, I think you all know I don't want
to do anything that slows down this project.
I want to make sure we keep moving forward.
And I am also concerned, while I love the building as well,
I am also concerned, you know, one
of the comments tonight gave me pause that if we move
to put this, if we move to designate this as historical,
then somehow we have hamstrung ourselves into
having to use this.
Or the argument becomes, there becomes a groundswell
of support to use this as the fire station
and just figure out how to make it work.
And I think that would be in our least interest,
not our best interest.
So I am just, I am hesitant.
I will just say that.
Uh oh, okay. Again,
I am hesitant to, to push it off.
I am hesitant to just say, let's wait.
And I'd almost like us to make a decision
because I feel like that gives a clear direction
and also removes any potential obstacles that could come
that put us in a position
where we have to say at some point.
Okay. Yeah. Well, I guess we'll just keep the building
and keep the fire department there.
Counselor. Scott? Um, I was gonna say
that I did appreciate the idea of keeping it on some sort
of list or date certain so that it doesn't get lost.
Um, I also think even if this were not our building
and we were not the developer
and any of this was not relevant to us, even
the designation doesn't
dictate preservation.
I know it really just says that you have to kind of go
through additional process steps, analysis, considerations.
I think we would probably do that anyway.
So I just, I I I agree with the sort of sentiment.
I just, I don't, I don't, I don't know
that I share your concerns about sort of, kind
of dropping it off of the list fully, so. Okay.
Yeah. And Councilor Coleman, I'm sorry,
I have not heard from you.
Would you like to opine?
Uh, I think everyone has has said it's like,
I don't feel we should be making a decision tonight.
Um, not set a date, uh, keep it on a workshop list
for another date because,
because which may give me more clarity
as we go through the workshop mm-hmm.
Process tonight.
Hmm. Okay. Oh, what to do.
Um, well, I could say my part though.
I, I think I have had the privilege of already seeing,
and it was open to the public,
a presentation about potentially what we could do
to design a new fire station, which we badly need
to do in this counselor's opinion.
Um, already the presentation
acknowledged the historic value, the historic, the, the,
the importance, uh, for many residents
of the building's, his history.
And already the presentation that I saw said
that the design team would thoroughly document what the
existing building is, as well as seek ways to
pay some respect to the design elements of
that building in the new design.
So I do do think that that is not going to change,
um, which makes me a bit more,
which makes me more comfortable
with saying we don't necessarily need
to place it on the inventory.
And I find myself surprised actually
coming to that conclusion.
But it is the one I've come to
because I'm a fan of historic preservation,
but I've already seen clearly that
what this building is is not going to be ignored
by the design team.
So at this point, it sounds to me like what
that we are saying that we are not saying at this time.
It's abs that the will of the majority of the counselors is
to put it on the inventory and that we're not also saying
that we'll never talk about this again.
Counselor Pride, you wanted to say something? No,
No. I'm, I'm agreement.
Okay. And I really think that
that's all we can do in this moment.
Is that okay? Team,
Have we agreed it's gonna continue on
the workshop list? Yeah.
Yes. Thank you.
Okay. I think that this workshop part
of our discussion has ended
and we're going to move to the new one.
I always like to offer my counselors
and myself the opportunity to stand up and stretch.
It's good for the soul and the body.
So it's getting out for midnight. Yes. Four
Minute stretch.
Four minutes only
Sip.
I
give everybody a timer.
Friends, fellow residents, let's get the,
let's get the into your seats.
Alright.
Seriously, that's a story.
Counselor Coleman, is she coming back? Mr.
Milan have a wonderful evening too.
I hope it's before midnight.
We're doing okay.
We're gonna get detention. Detention.
Um, oh my god, they're I uncomfortable.
There was a line. You can watch it. You behave yourselves.
Counselors. Okay. Um, we're going to get going
with the second
or third, actually workshop portion of our meeting tonight.
Um, which has to do, obviously with Mahoney
and city facilities and public safety facilities.
And take it away please, Mr. City Manager. Thank you. Thank
You Mayor. Um, mayor
had asked for a workshop
to more broadly discuss the Mahoney project
and city facilities.
So as I noted in the position paper,
this is really envisioned as a free flowing discussion
amongst council to provide guidance to staff.
Uh, here are more public input.
Um, there were several questions that
I think have baby been left hanging that we would want some,
uh, definite clarity on.
Um, I think you've already helped to answer, uh, one
of them, uh, earlier this evening.
But, um, those, those four questions are, uh, number one,
does council wish to continue with the plan construction
of a new central fire station on site?
Um, that's the order that you pass.
That's what it's called for.
Um, and if yes, uh, it would be helpful to have some,
you know, indication as to what you're looking for there.
As you know, the design right now does call
for a complete tear down.
There's a reason why I think that some of you have heard.
But, um, uh, if you want us to look at other options, um,
or give up entirely on that option, that would be helpful
to, um, to let us know.
Uh, number two, is it okay to proceed with a bond referendum
for public safety facilities?
I think the PD answer, um, is probably locked in,
but it really depends on your answer
to the previous question
because if you're also interested in other sites, um,
depending on how soon that Ken
or cannot happen locating, locating and,
and test fitting another site, um,
it may not be ready in time for a November bond ask.
And, um, uh, and,
and ideally we would shoot for something that, um, uh, ask
for both the police department
and fire on the same evening, on the same, uh, referendum.
Uh, third, uh, can city staff
and the design team began looking at other locations
for a combined city hall
and Hamlin, in addition to proceeding
with looking at the A one plus plus option
that council agreed upon at an earlier workshop in February.
Um, uh, it is something that if council's looking at cost,
um, could be a, a less expensive option.
So is that something that you would like us to look at,
or is it essentially Mahoney or, or bust?
Uh, and then finally, is the council open
to a split referendum?
Such as, but not including to, uh,
having voters approve one question about police
and fire, uh, asking another, um, about City Hall.
It could even be an advisory question.
Do you want city hall to be at Mahoney or a new location?
Um, and then, uh,
also we can't forget about library as of now.
Library is not included in, uh, any sort
of renovation at Mahoney or building new.
So, um, there would need to be some dollars that would need
to be invested into that building, um, uh, as it has,
you know, similar age to some of these other facilities
and, and need some work.
So, um, would it be appropriate
to bring forward a question, um, regarding that?
I know there's a couple staff that would like to add.
So I, I would like to add a few things here.
Um, I know our fire chief has some information that, um,
he had been asked to look into to share with the council
and also our library director had some comments that, uh,
he wanted to make.
And of course, anything from the design folks,
if they wanted to ask questions or, um,
or have anything to share, uh,
would welcome them to come up.
But, um, Kevin, Phil, either you wanna fight to go up first,
We could use some entertainment
if that's what's gonna happen.
Yeah, I've got some spots.
Thank you. Nate.
Craig came in early. He was the, he knew.
Yeah, just reset the podium. Get ready before
thank,
Uh, Phil Salberg, the fire chief.
I don't, uh, I don't know
how much you guys want me to get into this.
This is all in a memo that I think the city
manager sent to you all.
So just very briefly, I was asked some questions from, uh,
counsel about the location of our fire stations generally.
Um, what is sort of the, the, the things
that we think about when we're citing a fire station, um,
and whether or not we're kind of, um, well suited
as it stands right now?
So NFPA, national Fire Protection Association, the standards
that we follow for just about everything, um,
they're best practice standards.
They're not laws, um, necessarily.
Um, but NFPA 1710 is the one that deals with deployment of,
um, fire department.
So minimum staffing, response time, benchmarks, uh,
those sorts of things that we can use
as planning tools when we talk about fire stations.
So I provided some raw data last time at the
marathon workshop, uh,
that we didn't really get to talk about.
So in, um, 2025, our last operating year,
we did about 5,700 runs.
Um, when we did average turnout time based on NFPA, um,
we were at 64 seconds.
So that's from when the dispatcher tells us
that we have a call to when we get out the door.
Um, so that's within the NFPA standard.
And then our travel time from the time we leave the station
when we get to the call was about six and a half minutes.
Um, so NFPA is four for the first truck to arrive
and um, there's some reasons for that.
Uh, some policy decision reasons.
So, um, even though firefighters want to get to every place
as fast as I absolutely can, um, we know that not everything
that we go to is an emergency.
So we have all of our calls based on acuity.
The lowest acuity calls by my policy
to my folks is they have to drive with flow of traffic.
So that impacts our response time as we look
through our whole data set.
If I just pull out, um, building fires
or reported building fires, we're at five, five minutes.
So we're very, very close to
what NFP tells us that we're supposed to be.
I think that's pretty good. Um, so how do we decide
where we put places?
So we shared some maps last time
and I have a couple that we'll talk about here in a minute,
mile and a half radius.
That's the ISO, that's what they look at.
And it's a great sort of first look visual as to
where you want to put a fire station.
So you can look at your city, uh, drop a bunch
of circles on there and then sort of play around with, wow,
is that in the middle of a residential neighborhood?
Is that near a busy intersection?
Um, is that near my, um, call volume?
Is that near a major roadways?
And so the one and a half mile do a good job is just sort
of giving us a big picture,
but then we want to really drill down into things like drive
time modeling GIS stuff, um,
looking at our historical call distribution,
looking at intersection roadway capacity.
Uh, how close are we to major roadways,
and then where are our call density and target hazards.
So this is how we're distributed right now.
This is, uh, one
and a half miles around all three of our fire stations.
And so you see, we, we distribute pretty evenly
over most of the city.
Um, you might pick up on cash corner,
so it overlaps quite a bit with the other two,
um, districts.
Um, but there's a nuance in our circles
and that we look at engines as a mile and a half.
So comfort trucks is a mile and a half
and then we look at ladder trucks as two and a half miles.
And so this is the ladder trucks response area so
that it sort of overlaps both
of those two other districts, if that kind of makes sense.
So that's in the middle of the city
and that's why they're kind of a little closer together.
They're also closer together.
'cause history is where we, we, um,
based on central's data only, this is just one year worth
of central fire stations call,
so central within Central's district.
Um, and the line represents a mile
and a half from central just out into another regions there,
just to give you an idea of where the falls go.
Um, and you can see that we're generally hot around Ville
and Ferry Village, which makes sense.
That's where folks live and people drive our numbers, uh,
and we're less warm as we get out towards Cape Elizabeth
and LUTs Field in that area.
And so Central Fire Station is pretty well suited
for the response district that we're in now,
where our call volume is now, where it's been
for the whole time I've been here
and where I expect it to be, you know, in, in the future.
Uh, so we looked at a couple of different options
that were just, um, asks for us.
So this is, um, a one
and a half mile around Hill Street, the sort of bright area.
Um, and you can see that shifts central way to the west, um,
and really overlaps the other areas.
So probably not a great site for that.
Um, Mahoney, we, um, put a, put a circle on that as well.
Um, that would lend itself
to a little more exploration if we really wanted to
because it is well within the current area,
it doesn't shift us particularly to the east.
It doesn't shift us particularly to the south.
It does place us on Ocean Street, which has some issues, um,
more so than Broadway in terms of traffic inundation,
especially during the commute.
Um, as you know, most folks
who are commuting are coming from the south, right?
Driving straight past central to the north in the morning.
Uh, so we don't really have a lot
of impact there on Broadway where we're located now.
I would expect we would more on Ocean Street.
Uh, another site that was asked us
to plot was Hamlet School.
Could we move Central fire to Hamlet School?
And again, it's within our current sort of one
and a half mile circle so it could, um,
warrant some future exploration.
But what I would suggest
with this one is we're more into a neighborhood.
Uh, we're much further away from
where our historic call volume centers,
we are placing a whole lot
of our first two response district, Cape Elizabeth.
And so, um, this is probably not one
that I would necessarily recommend either.
Um, in terms of inundation,
and this is one that we are obviously concerned about,
an tho Creek and Broadway has been identified with, um,
the inundation mapping as being vulnerable in the future.
We know that the city knows that.
Um, but with a redesign of slab on grade
where we move everything up, um, to ground level,
maybe elevate the site a little bit.
If we're able to move the building back a little bit,
we think this is still gonna be a resilient site.
Um, and we also don't expect
that we're gonna abandon the major East west quarter in the
city, which is Broadway.
And so we just, we do expect
that we'll still have access to that.
And so those are sort of the, um, questions
that I think I was asked to answer
and hopefully I did both in the memo
and here with just those few slides.
Thanks Chief. Kevin,
That worked.
It worked good though that that's an improvement.
Should have thought ahead. I didn't really prepare a
presentation of any sort, I just have notes.
However, I do have paper copies if
anyone who wants to see my notes.
Um, Kevin Davis, library director,
God Being inundated.
Um, I'm thankful to have the opportunity to talk
to y'all tonight because up till now haven't really said
anything outside of our committee work.
Um, I've heard a few comments time
and again throughout this process,
through the committee work,
through the public events we've had the tours we did at the
library and, and, uh, uh, witnessing the,
the council meetings as well that I just wanted
to go on record with some more factual information about,
um, or clarification at least.
It's, it's frequently comments about the library seem
to frequently be couched in
the library business somehow being an on the way out service
that people are doing digital books
and all that sort of stuff.
We've seen no evidence of that.
Our use of physical materials continues
to be strong if not growing,
and we've added access to digital materials on top of that,
which has hugely increased our use
of the library in general.
People are using both. One is not replacing the other.
Um, in terms of programming, there's been some suggestion of
moving library programming to potentially the Mahoney site
or offsite to maximize the use of our building.
Two things I want to address there.
Program is the beating heart of
what a public library does these days and not everything.
And honestly, probably less than half
of the programs we post in the library
have nothing to do with books.
The library is not about books.
Books are a part of what we do.
Our programs drew through
last year we had over 15,000 people from our community
and probably outside our community as well,
participating in more than 700 programs offered at the main
library, which I think is pretty good, uh,
to the idea that somehow we're a quiet, sleepy little,
little, uh, service on the advice of what
of the library designer who's been
working on the Mahoney project.
He recommended I add a cheapo little door counter
to the library to, to help him get some numbers of the sort
of foot traffic we have.
I acted the activated that on one door, the primary door
that people use off of our parking lot on December 22nd.
So in just over two months we've had over
13,000 visitors to that building.
13,000. That's an average of,
and I've been keeping track of this even correlating it
with our hours of operation, with the number of hours
we have been open to the public since that day.
We are averaging over 27 visitors
to the building every hour of every day.
Um, that's, that's a lot.
And I've historically undercounted our, our use
of the building because it's, we haven't had a counter.
We've estimated based on circulation,
our circulation always put me at a number of
around 200 people a day.
So we're showing a good number of people are coming
to the building, not checking out materials, they're coming
for meetings for programs, socialize with friends
to work at, uh, our limited work and study space.
So they are using it, lots of people are using it
To our collection and how that's used.
One, try not to let things rub me the wrong way,
but you know, there's been references
to the library is essentially book storage.
And it's not that what we have on our shelf
shelves in the library has to earn.
Its keep through use to stay on our shelves.
We don't keep things this, we were late to the game.
South Portland public libraries probably
there may have been smaller towns
that have created libraries since 1966,
but I think one of ours is our, our library is probably one
of the last libraries to be founded in a,
in a community in this state.
Certainly the last large community to establish a library
where we're babies in the grand scheme of things.
But because we came almost 70 years
into the city's founding, we have never served a role
as a historical archive.
So our library is an active use public library,
not an archive, not a historical repository of any sort.
Um, that's just not what we do. Our space is limited.
Things need to earn their key, their, uh,
library standards on how you establish
what your collection should be
when things lose their space on the shelves.
And we follow that. Our stacks in our building are
arranged in exactly the footprint
that they were when the building was open
to the public in 66.
However, looking at historic pictures of the building,
I only recently discovered that we have nearly twice
as many bookshelves within that same footprint.
That at some point I've been
with the city coming up in 25 years now, and this was well
before my time and I believe
before the prior director,
so probably sometime in the seventies, late seventies
or early eighties, they wanted
to maximize the floor space in there.
So squished everything together
and added more shelves in the same footprint.
So our aisles for access beat the bare minimum
for 80 a accessibility where just queing by,
were putting books seven feet plus
off the floor using our top shelf using
shelves at floor level.
Both of those provide accessibility issues for a good number
of our users, including myself these
days as my knees get older.
Um, so, you know,
it's, I'm uncomfortable at this point from
what I've heard at this point, that there's just been the
general statement of we'll deal with the library later.
I've been here 25 years,
this is the second time the city has paid
outside library consultants
and experts to assess what we need for space.
Have been given the same answer once in 2008
and now with the current program.
And the first time nothing was done, I had
direction from the council at that point,
do whatever's recommended that costs nothing
or costs cost next to nothing.
So we cleaned up the building basically,
but we're well overdue.
Uh, for, for what we need.
I think the community deserves better
and I, I would feel much more comfortable with this process
if there was an actual commitment to doing something.
I do not dispute public safety should come first.
No, challenge with that, but just saying we'll deal
with the library at some point without a real plan, without
identifying a parcel of land is uncomfortable.
So I guess that's pretty much it,
but happy to answer any questions I,
anyone may have. Thank you. Thanks.
Thank you. And lastly, Craig,
anything folks wanted to share?
Skip, you're good? Nope. Share.
Alright. Okay. Thanks.
Thanks. And you have more to offer
Us. Nope, that's it.
Just hoping you know if in,
in whatever your discussions
and guidance are, if you can help us address those questions
as well, that would be, um, well,
Okay. I think some
counselors may have questions
for the two presenters.
Oh, councilor Walker.
Um, this is a question for the library director
and Kevin does not know I'm answer asking this,
so I apologize that I didn't think, I didn't think, uh,
I didn't think about this until you were talking.
So I am a former member of the Library advisory board.
So I think I'm privy to some information which leads
to my full worded support
for including the library in this project.
Um, but I think it would be helpful to share
with my fellow counselors some of the bugaboos, I think,
for lack of a better word, um, that our particular library
construction presents when thinking about upgrading things
like the book drop.
Mm-hmm. Do you think you could share maybe a little bit
about that thought process?
Sure. And something I meant
to mention when I was here first that ties into this,
there's been an affinity expressed many times over from
the council, from members of the public, uh, to myself,
even about an affinity for the building.
And much like the previous discussion about the fire
department, I adore our building.
I think it's great. I'm an architecture nerd.
I, I've always loved the building.
Was lucky enough to establish a bit of a friendship
with the original architect, John Leisure.
And he passed away a few years ago.
But I got to talk to him extensively about the development
of the building and all this sort of stuff.
Um, I would love to see it continued.
I just know it doesn't work for our library services
for a community this size.
So the challenging thing as, uh,
Councillor Walker was referring
to over the years on the board, we were trying to think
of things we could do to improve the building as it was,
we don't have electrical infrastructure in the building.
Uh, we had an incident,
and I can't remember if you were on the
board when Amy was on the board.
That was my first meeting. Okay.
Your very first meeting during the winter months
2013.
We've been doing this long now, um,
meeting an advisory board meeting in a winter evening.
It was dark. And one of our board members came in just just
beside herself because she
almost got backed over in the parking lot.
We don't have external lighting in that parking lot.
So that became our thing.
That's clearly something we can address.
We started pulling that thread
and found we don't have electrical
infrastructure in the building.
The electrical panel is under undersized to service
any lights, major safety issue, the book drop.
We, I came up with a proposal many years ago
and got funding for $10,000 in the CIP to relocate.
Our book drop, you know, like four feet down the wall from
where it is now, currently it's cut through a window,
a satellite window from our, our parking lot.
Just trying to move that down.
Once got the engineers in, they pointed out
that the walls at that ground floor are like a foot, foot
and a half deep.
And he explained, can't cut a hole a foot wide
through a wall, a concrete wall
that's a foot and a half deep.
Uh, so that became a much bigger issue than and time
and again, as we look at issues with the building, we see
that one thing's connected to another
and becomes a much bigger process.
There haven't been easy fixes, locks.
Were getting to the point that
after 60 years, some of the, uh, door handles,
um, inside the building, it happened in, in my office,
actually went to lunch one day, came back,
couldn't get it in, but my office, the lock was broken.
It cost the city well over $300
to get a replacement lock.
These are all vintage hardware from the sixties
and we weren't even trying to replace it
with vintage hardware from the sixties.
'cause you can't get it anymore. But to find something
that works within the doors that, uh,
that building was built with,
you just can't do it these days.
So no easy fix. And I, you've encountered this a few times
with trying to deal with issues in our building that
everything's just, it's classic.
They don't do classic anymore.
Um, one more question. Sure. Sorry.
Is this is going to lend itself well
to a future agenda item that we have tonight.
Um, so if for, let's say the library wanted to, was
needed to stay in its current building
as it's currently constituted, nothing can really change.
Um, would some sort of wholesale renovation
of like the children's room be possible?
Or are there potential health and,
and financial concerns with that as well?
Health issues in that, one
of those little threads we pulled at one point is
this would look a world, a world better
inside if we replace the carpet.
The carpet in that building is laid down over tiles
and MasTec, which contain asbestos, glued down to the tiles.
The carpet is coming up in many places.
When you walk through the space, you see the carpet all kind
of, we and won't be in places,
but if we disturbed that carpet, we're in the position
of having to do a full building.
Remediation of the flooring that's
underneath the building was open with hard surface,
bright white tiles throughout,
and that was carpeted over at some point.
Uh, so the children's room is part of that.
Um, also our needs are well beyond cosmetic.
It's ne not just slapping pan on, like I said, the,
the space.
We don't have the space to house the collection
that we've crammed in there now.
In addition, we don't have the space to offer the services
that people expect at public libraries these days.
We're following very short of that. Does that answer?
Thank you.
Anyone else have questions for the presenters?
I just, I do have just one for you, Kevin.
Um, if you wouldn't mind, um,
because really this is,
I don't recall counsel having a presentation
that about the library at
pros, cons, things that are wrong and things that are right.
I just don't recall us within the past couple
of years having a thorough presentation.
And, and I think that, who knows,
maybe a workshop should be ahead of us.
But right now my question is when I saw on the plans
potentially for the, what had been recommended
by the Mahoney committee.
And so you take a look at the floor where the library is
and lots of the current functions
of the library are fitted into what we think,
what is the current Mahoney building,
but then what you notice, what was, um, presented
and recommended for the extra, um, had a lot
to do with space for young families
and preschool programs and then also for teens.
So my question is, what kinds of programs
and you needs would be met by having
that extra space?
Sure. I'll rewind back to the original building.
If you look at the historic photos, the side
of the building, the, the windows that face Broadway,
that entire side of the building, when we opened
to the public, that was a wide open front to back,
um, essentially like a, a comfortable social space.
There were couches, chairs, the other side,
the Highland Avenue side was clearly
established as a study space.
Over the years, that entire Broadway side of the building,
we've added public computers, which are used regularly
online card catalogs, DVD collections, teen area.
So that entire space has been consumed over the years
with services that have come along that were never dreamt,
never even dreamt of for a public librarian.
66. And we were able to accommodate those somewhat,
but at the expense of losing that kind of social
comfortable space.
So some of that space is that, the space I will say
that we have in the Mahoney plan is
smaller than what's recommended.
And that comes from our ability to
have shared resources with other city functions.
Library desperately needs quiet study rooms
and conference rooms and things like that.
People expect that from public libraries.
So do other city departments.
We could probably minimize having to build, build these kind
of rooms in different facilities
by having them in one building.
Uh, same with building mechanical and stuff.
If we don't have to account for a thousand square feet
for building mechanical stuff on our own,
because we're part of a larger building, we save that.
So we have in the Mahoney plan have a square footage
that's less than what a library,
a standalone library would need.
So what I, what I am wanting to hear more of is services.
How will the young families, the preschoolers
and the teens be served by that space?
Sure. Thank you. Uh,
one thing public libraries do these days,
and we aren't far enough in the plans
to have all these spaces yet,
but sensory rooms for, for uh, neurodivergency, uh,
having a quiet space for people to get away
or just calm down and relax
and get away from the hustle about some things.
Mm-hmm. That's one thing.
Having, uh, purpose designed
spaces to meet programming needs.
So for instance, the LIG gout public library in Augusta when
they were renovated has a, I don't know
what they officially call it.
I think of it as a slop room off of the children's room.
There is a, an enclosed programming space
that has all the cabinets for storing all the glitter
and art supplies that the children's librarians need.
Nice cushioned floor tables, sinks all the amenities
to facilitate those programs.
Um, and in addition, just having the space,
having comfortable seating allows for relaxation.
It's not all just go
and get something off the shelf and leave.
People want to hang out.
We see that currently with baby story time
after story time happens in the room downstairs, most
of the parents with their kids come up
and just sit on the floor in the children's room, completely
plugs up the children's room.
But it's a space that is, is used now
and we could have a better space so
We could offer these young families bigger, nicer, um,
more families served, et cetera.
And it's, yes, and it's, it is not extravagant stuff.
It's just space. It's space they're coming expecting.
Um, and to be honest, we hear, have heard frequently
of people who love our library for the collection,
but go to the Cape Elizabeth Library
because it's a nicer children's space.
They have happens a lot.
And the director there, I have
a thing or two to say about her.
Um, but, uh, yeah, so,
so space is people
want something a little more purpose built.
Well, thank you. Sure. Thank you very much.
Alright, any other questions?
Alright, we'll open this for public comment.
Remember that the, um, council's talking tonight about the
locations for police and fire
and maybe the type of referendum we might, um,
work toward for the fall.
And, um, uh, what is our other subject,
whether our Mahoney committee, um,
whether this council would like the design team
and the city staff.
Sorry, I did misspoke.
It's not the Mahoney committee, um, to
come up with some additional ideas.
That's the best way to summarize it.
So if anyone wants to make public comment that would sort of
align with those topics.
Okay, I see one person
and then I think we're gonna have two or even three,
Uh, hello counselors.
Marie Veronique Emmons Pesin Avenue.
Um, for, just for note, I am also a member
of the Library Advisory Board.
We know that we have significant infrastructure needs
to address, and it's gonna require money in the form
of bond issues to make that happen.
Needed attention to our facilities has been deferred
for some time now.
And it is my hope that the city council puts forward a plan
to start addressing these as soon as possible.
I fully agree with the suggestion to prior
to prioritize new public safety facilities,
given the condition
of the current police station in Central Fire Station,
I think we, we would be well served if we can get that
to a bond referendum this November.
I am happy to hear that the library has not been forgotten.
I understand that City council no longer wishes
to include the library as part of the proposed Mahome
city center project.
The library needs additional space not only for books,
but also for things like study rooms,
which we do not currently have.
It also needs electrical upgrades, replacement,
or serious upgrade of its heating and cooling systems.
This will involve a major renovation and expansion.
While I would applaud asking voters for a sum of money
to make renovations to the existing main library,
I wonder whether such a question could be brought forward
this November as this is a recent change in direction
and I have not seen any plans for what a renovated
and expanded main library might look like
or what the scope of that project could be.
Are there conceptual plans sitting on a shelf somewhere
that could be brought forward for a cost estimation?
Finally, with regards to the question of a facility to hold
what is currently in City Hall Hamlin in the assessor's
office, I cannot support a plan
to use Mahoney for this purpose.
Given the very high cost that would be needed just
to bring Mahoney up to code so that it could be reutilized.
An alternative site
for a new city building would save the citizens
of this city, tens of millions of dollars over a reuse
of Mahoney that would leave a substantial portion of
that building unused and vacant.
The cost would be even higher if we decide
to fill the empty space with something else.
Knowing that we first
and foremost will need to fund construction
of new public fa safety facilities,
and that the library will also need money so
that can be upgraded
and expanded to provide the sort of city services
that a city of this size should expect from
their public library.
I feel that it would be prudent to not waste money
by moving city services to a building
that is not well suited for this purpose.
I acknowledge that the building has sentimental value
to many city residents,
and I hope that a direct developer could be found
who could put the building to better use.
Thank you. Thank you
Very much.
Anyone else?
Peter Cullen in again.
Uh, first of all,
today's action taken earlier sort of blows a hole in
what I was gonna talk about the police station,
since you've already, this made a decision.
We tricked you and, uh,
because I would've suggested
that given the comprehensive plan, that the
main National Guard location would've been a perfectly good
spot for a new police station.
And there, you know, that would not take
property off the tax rolls.
This, the only downside I see to the Walgreens thing is
that you're taking two
and a half, three, 4 million off the property tax rolls
that, that, uh, will now go to, uh, a non-paying,
uh, use.
Uh, but the, in addition to that, the,
I keep on coming back to thinking that Mahoney, uh,
should just go and become some private development
because the gym
and the, uh, auditorium have no private market
to offset any costs that are gonna come to them, um,
at least from the city point of view.
But yesterday's news about, uh, going
to having a four elementary school network
versus five suggests the possibility that maybe
as unpopular as this would be,
that the Brown school would be a perfect place for city hall
functions and could make a campus with the library
that would have some synergy to it.
And I obviously,
but that doesn't fit your referendum timetable.
Uh, so I I also would issue a little bit of caution that
the drive to, uh, electoral end
versus the right decision to make
should be a balanced conscious decision.
We shouldn't be forcing something to go
to referendum if in fact there's some better options
that should be presented to the public. Thank you.
Thank you.
Lauren Shapiro Deke Street.
After attending Monday's school budget workshop,
one thing became very clear.
Expanding affordable housing on the eastern side
of the city is not optional.
It's essential. Our elementary schools remain divided
as the district works
to confront the deep rooted reality of segregation.
We need to acknowledge a hard truth.
Housing segregation continues to drive school segregation.
As long as our neighborhoods remain economically divided,
our schools will reflect that.
Repurposing Mahoney into a centralized space
for city services may sound appealing,
but it does not address their most urgent challenges.
Repeatedly hearing about the financial pressures facing our
city, the strain on school funding
and the growing list of must haves,
it is increasingly evident that the Mahoney project
as is, is a nice to have.
Our more pressing responsibility is
to address the lack of affordable housing.
So our school department is not left trying
to solve problems that stem from longstanding
gaps in city planning.
People are not moving here because of city hall
or planning department offices.
They're drawn here because of our schools, their proximity
to homes, the walkability of our neighborhoods, the sense
of belonging those neighborhoods foster
and the shared desire to build community.
If we wanna strengthen our city's future,
we must invest in the foundations
that make it attractive and equitable.
At the last workshop, counselor Pride mentioned visiting,
revisiting Mahoney as a potential school campus.
This idea was raised a year ago.
Its reemergence signals that we have yet to fully grapple
with how to create a more just and balanced education.
But we also need to be realistic in today's climate.
It is unlikely we would secure the level of federal
or state funding that supported the middle
school consolidation.
Without that funding, the cost burden would fall
on local taxpayers.
And consolidation alone would not solve the fundamental
challenges of busing, transportation, time,
and proximity for our youngest learners.
So this comes down to priorities.
Are we prepared to invest tens of millions
of dollars in a city services center?
Or should we use Mahoney as an equitable housing solution
to help stabilize neighborhoods
and strengthen our schools without placing
that financial burden on taxpayers?
If we are serious about access
and opportunity, we must also rethink that pattern
of selling public land to private developers only
to see it transformed into million dollar condos
that do little to address our housing shortage
or broaden affordability.
The decisions we make today will
shape who gets to live here tomorrow.
We should be using public assets to advance public good.
So families of varied incomes can put roots down.
Young children can attend schools close to home,
and our growth reflects our values. Thank you.
Thank you.
Uh, Lynn. Holler, Levit Steel Road. And um, full disclosure.
Craig Piper is my husband.
So, but I'm, I'm here as also an architect.
And of course, uh, resident, uh, citizen taxpayer.
Um, from the beginning,
this has been such a large and complex project.
Um, and then the construction cost estimate came in so high,
leaving the city with a dizzying number of choices around
what services to prioritize, timelines to aim for,
and cost to manage.
Um, the existing building at the center
of this discussion is Mahoney.
Um, and tonight I was happy to see, uh, that
Mahoney is on the inventory of historical resources, uh,
here, um, in South Portland.
Um, I would like to just state that the preservation
of Mahoney's exterior, um, along Broadway
and Route 77 should rise to the top of the priority list.
The Mahoney building is steeped in South Portland history.
It's exterior is beautiful
and architecturally significant
buildings like Mahoney don't get built anymore.
And, um, keeping it in a city, uh,
as a city controlled property
and preserving it should be a city priority.
My first choice would be that Mahoney becomes the city,
city, city center and library.
The building's impressive size
and visibility would stand as, um, an anchor
of the South Portland public services
and a symbol of South Portland's pride,
longevity, and unique heritage.
Alternatively, if Mahoney becomes affordable housing,
it could serve as a symbol of South Portland's dedication
to inclusion and recognition
that everyone is welcome here no matter what.
The control of Mahoney's future
and appearance should always
lie in the hands of South Portland.
So Mahoney is just one piece of the complicated project.
I think that putting the entire project to referendum,
which failed because of its cost, an alternative way
to get everything what we want,
but not see a huge immediate impact to taxes, is
to break it into phases
by dividing a large project into pieces to be built
and paid for over a longer period of time.
We'd get it done, get it all done,
and the tax increases would happen at intervals at a much
gentler upward slope over the years,
taxpayers would know the increases are coming,
but I think it's important to say
that they'd also see progress
as the initial construction phases came to fruition
and the city services services improve. Thanks.
Thank you very much. Anyone else?
Okay. I mean, don't hesitate guys. It's getting late.
Um, Kathy Chapman, Beaufort Street.
Uh, good evening counselors.
Um, thank you
for putting these important issues in front of us tonight.
Um, and I do think that, uh, we have heard all
of these are important issues.
All of these buildings, we have what,
four major buildings in the city that they're asking, um, to
rebuild or, uh, renovate or build again.
And I would say as a taxpayer, um,
I'm concerned about the effect
of these proposed bonds on my property taxes,
which are already very high.
Um, I do not think that we can afford to do all
of this at once the way we were talking.
Um, as it is, the previous proposal, um, for Mahoney, um,
had to be scaled down.
Uh, if you just divided into more than one bond, it's still,
the total is too much for taxpayers to afford.
So as the previous speaker said, we need to divide this up,
prioritize it, start with
what we absolutely need to do first.
Um, I don't know of any city
that starts building four new buildings at once.
I've never heard of that. It's quite, uh, uh, unaffordable.
Um, so we need to prioritize and work together.
As far as the Mahoney building goes, it appears
that it would cost, um, $30 million more
to renovate than it would to buy, to build a new building.
As, as I understand it, um, much as I love Mahoney
and would want it preserved, I would look at it
as affordable housing, workforce housing.
Actually South Portland housing had a great plan for that.
And they could use the tax credits as it is on the historic,
uh, designation.
Um, and hopefully we could use the, uh, gym and com
and theater if possible.
Um, as far
as the fire station goes being built in its current
location, I am against that as it is in an inundation area,
which according to our co new comprehensive plan,
we shouldn't be building critical infrastructure
within that area.
I think we should stick with that.
Um, it makes no sense to put, to make it a new problem
that we have to solve when we are gonna have
to look at the water treatment plant,
which is gonna be a very expensive proposition.
We should build somewhere where we don't have those problems
and try to find some way of using that building, um,
with a private developer with historic designation
that would be interested in, um,
doing something else with it.
Um, as far as the library goes, um, that is
of course very valuable.
I love my library. However, we can't do everything at once.
Um, we need to prioritize
and then have some time to figure out
what would be the best avenue to go, what we should do.
I haven't heard any figures or costs.
What we do need is cost for the public.
How much are our taxes gonna be raised
by these propositions?
Nobody is mentioning that. That's really important.
No one will vote for this bond if we
don't know that. Thank you.
Thank you. Okay, thank you.
Okay, counselors. Jeff Steinman Cottage Road.
I didn't mean to linger. Sorry about that.
The three minutes tough at a time like this.
We've been mulling this matter, it seems forever.
And when I sat down to make notes,
I ended up drawing a boat.
So a couple of things I want to, I wanna make sure to say.
One is, uh, congratulations.
First of all on the early business that
somehow we accomplished you accomplished this evening.
I think that takes, that should take some
of the pressure off of, uh, what it is.
Uh, you have. We have tried it, been up to all this time.
The second thing is, as another speaker said,
if it's possible to relieve yourself, ourselves
of the pressure of that referendum deadline out there,
I think it's at least useful to think about
that if it gives us time to kind of regain our sanity
and not feel so pushed by, um, that deadline.
The third thing is, if I go back to where I started
with this anyway, it was that we have this problem
that a number of our city facilities are at the point
where we don't have the option of ignoring them any longer.
We've gotta do something,
we've gotta spend quite a lot of money.
However, we, however we go.
And the Mahoney project came along, not so much
because of that, but kind of simultaneously with, with that
and this notion of, uh, a campus, a, a center for the city,
a a place where our imaginations as well
as our business is going to get, uh, inspired.
Um, all of that comes together.
It still seems to me that Mahoney offers us opportunities
that even include, uh, a kind of economy,
especially if we think of city services on one floor of
that building, the library occupying
another floor of that building.
That's the thing that we've kind of lost track of over time.
The Mahoney building has to say to citizens,
this is worth it.
This is your building. This is the public space.
The library announces that in ways that city services don't.
Even though two of them are aimed at all of us.
The library is a place that gathers the community naturally.
We've heard tonight about the way in which it's a magnet,
um, and the numbers of people that it draws,
the people that it serves.
So when we talk about the money, God knows what
that number is gonna come out to be,
but it's a lot less than $190 million.
The thing we need to be able to say to each other is,
this may not be a bargain, but it's still a great value.
This building that we're imagining now
for the next a hundred years will have immediate
consequences for you and your family.
Thank,
Thank you.
I'll be quick, I promise. Thank you.
Although you can take three
minutes. I don't. It's all yours.
Um, ed K 98 Romano Road.
I first off two weeks ago, I came here said, buy
that building and you bought that building.
God bless America. So with that,
I propose the following.
One 30, uh, Western Avenue. It's 20,700 square feet.
It's currently a fur furniture store.
A beautiful building on two acres.
It's for sale for $4.9 million. It's open space.
Even has an elevator.
I'm not a real estate agent, just for the record,
I'm not looking to make a commission.
But I think the Mahoney thing has been overplayed.
I wouldn't put it to housing, that's just my opinion.
I would put it to something that could actually
drive some revenue to this town.
And Portland, Maine, for whatever reason,
hates the idea of Live Nation.
I love music. I would love to see Live Nation come over
to the Mahoney building.
I would love to steal that from Portland, Maine.
And I think it would be a beautiful thing
to have a place I could, if I could walk
to a concert, it would be amazing.
Uh, with that, I will say this, A gentleman
that I financed a house for got foreclosed upon.
And it wasn't because he paid too much or
because his interest rate was too high
because his property taxes over $5,000 from 984 square
foot, three bedroom, one bathhouse
with no garage on an eighth of an acre of land,
or a 10th, excuse me, acre of land.
Pretty sad.
And I think the re-imagining is beautiful,
but re-imagining for who the people who lived here for
roughly speaking 16 years and then got pushed out.
He's not gonna enjoy the library,
he's not gonna enjoy anything.
And the last I checked, we have a community center.
It's got a pool, we have a beautiful
high school with a beautiful library.
We have another library over a golf course.
I just think the Mahoney thing. Sell it to a developer.
Buy this 4 million billion four, uh, 4 billion, excuse me,
four over a $4.9 million building in Put city hall in there.
Maybe you got two acres. I don't know about,
you can put the fire station over there,
but maybe you could just fix the fire station.
But the police station I'm excited about.
Thank you for that.
Thank you very much. Alright,
come, come, come, come, come, come. Very welcome.
John Con John Connie Beach Street.
My turn. Yes, yes. Go.
Uh, I I just want to extend the, the timeframe a little bit.
I'm not focused on November or this year,
but I am focused on, on these problems.
It, it seems to me that, uh, we are in a dire, uh,
financial situation.
And it seems to me that that's going to continue for a
considerable time.
This is not a problem that we can solve with, with some, uh,
acute trick that takes place in the next six months.
We have, uh, financial issues with, with buildings
and schools and libraries.
We have financial issues that are going to go on for years.
And it's obvious to me,
and I just would like to suggest that it be obvious to you
that we have to
increase the tax space in South Portland.
We have to have more sources of not,
not the same people being charged more.
We need more sources of, uh, tax revenue.
We need a larger tax base.
That seems to me obvious.
And the most obvious thing to do is to encourage
development, business development
and residential development.
I think this city, to my mind,
to survive financially,
I think things are much worse than most people
are acknowledging.
I think the survival of this city requires
a focus on expanding the tax base.
And that, as far as I know, requires encouraging
business and residential development.
It's not something most South Portland people like to hear,
but I don't think we have a choice. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Alright. Any other public comment?
Don't see anyone. Oh, come on you.
Uh, Rosemary DeAngelo Pleasantdale, I, um, I,
I just wanted to respond
because that I, I'm in this dilemma.
You know, that I feel like public safety is something
that I think the public feels very strongly about
and it's likely an area that the public would support.
Uh, I love our library.
I think it's a community center
and a space where, where I go a lot.
And I think in terms of our, our issues around one climate,
future libraries are sustainable
and con contribute to helping with eliminating waste,
borrowing books and, and,
and renting movies instead of streaming.
All of those things I support.
But at the same time, I just listened to this last speaker
and, you know, I'm, I'm looking at what we're trying to do
with our school budget.
Um, we're, we're not in a deficit.
We, we, we need
to cut $8 million from our school budget in order
to stay within a 6% increase.
And, and there are people who are talking about,
you know, how great our neighborhoods are
and how walkable they are,
but not all our neighborhoods are like, go over, go over
to the west side of the city.
There's, there's not walkable neighborhoods,
there's not parks, there's not access to the green belt.
So we have so many inequities in this city.
Um, I was driving the other day and,
and you know,
I was frustrated about some things I was dealing with.
So I stopped at the Baker's bench in Westbrook
where I've never stopped before,
but I bought these two fabulous pastries and it was $7
and 72 cents.
And, you know, I didn't think twice about it.
And then I got in my car while I was chomping on this huge,
um, uh, you know, cinnamon bun.
And I turned on NPR
and there was the program about Alice, which is the acronym
for, for basically people living on the edge.
You know, people who couldn't afford to do what I just did.
You know, just couldn't afford to just stop
and not think about it
and buy two huge pastries, which, you know,
my hips don't really need.
But that's a different issue, you know?
So, uh, it's just, there is not equity in this city.
There is not, uh, like, you know, somebody
who can talk about our walkable neighborhoods.
Like all our neighborhoods are not walkable there.
There's not, there's not safety the same level in all
parts of our cities.
It, it just, it doesn't exist.
And so I think we do need to think about our tax base.
We need to think about
what it is people are expected to pay.
And I'll just say a, a woman I know, I don't even know her,
but her name is Joyce
and she said, okay, if you're gonna increase taxes,
if a lien on my property
and take it out when I die,
that those are our taxpayers too.
Like those are the, those are our taxpayers too. Thank you.
Thank you. Alright,
I think we're gonna call public comment
closed on this topic.
Thank you counselors.
The good news is it's nearly
43 minutes sooner than the last time we had
this kind of a workshop.
So, um, who I don't think,
did we have questions to answer, Scott?
I didn't really hear questions. So Counselor Walker,
I'd like to make a suggestion.
So in terms of the questions that we have, um,
the suggestion may get to it,
but my suggestion is threefold.
Um, I think that we move forward with referendum
for November that we focus solely on PD
and fire with that referendum PD going into the
artist formerly known as Walgreens
and Fire, uh, saying on the site that it is,
but moving back so that it's out of the inundation zone.
Um, and then we use the rest of 2026
and the first half of 2027
to find a suitable spot for Mahoney.
Um, I think that we should, uh, encourage our staff
to explore alternate sites.
And then in 2020, excuse
Me, you said suitable spot for Mahoney. Did you mean City
Center? City Center,
sorry. Thank you again. Yeah.
Um, the thing that is known as colloquially as maho,
the Mahoney project, but yes.
City center, um, and then use the rest of 2026
and 27 to, you know, go big with a bold vision
that does not cost $194 million.
That accomplishes our goals. That includes the library.
That's my idea. That's my suggestion. Okay.
So can I, do you mind if I just ask
to make sure we're hearing it clearly?
So what you're saying is we should explore other venues
for the, the things that are spo.
We're supposed to go in Mahoney, strip
Everything else out of the 2026 budget except for police
and fire, and then you, and then direct our staff
and our resources to search for a different site
for city services that include the library.
And as far, far as the question
of fire station on the same site where you're saying yes
because you believe it can be mitigated
by being pulled back or correct.
Higher ground as the chief referenced.
Okay, well we've heard clearly from this
counselor, counselor West.
I just wondered for tonight, could we just
separate those two things
and first have a discussion about the police
and fire and public safety?
I agree with Councilor Walker that it's only that for the,
a ballot measure in November, we're really only ready
to go forward with something that has
to do with police and fire.
And, and then that takes a little bit
of the pressure off tonight because if we can focus on that
and get that decided
and it gets to be pretty late, we can kind of know
that we have more time to discuss the other. Mm-hmm.
So I, I hear you both kind of the Venn diagram for both
of you is we should prepare for a referendum on police
and fire and that, um, even though you both sort
of said it in different ways, I think you're kind
of similar in more discussion about Mahoney. Not now.
That's what I'd like to do.
'cause I think it's getting really late
and I'd like to have a detailed,
I have quite a bit to say on the fire.
Okay. Um, okay.
Anyone else want to speak right this
moment? Counselor Scott,
I would approve of us continuing a discussion on police
and fire this evening.
And I do appreciate the idea of continuing
to discuss Mahoney Library
and City Services,
finding a location even if it's temporary to move into.
So I, I like bifurcating those two discussion topics
and I'm happy to then move into my discussion topic
on police and fire.
Okay. Is there anyone who objects to sticking tonight
with police and fire?
And the one question that I have is,
we do still have an existing Mahoney committee
that we charge with exploring,
I won't call it the bare bones,
we'll call it the a one plus plus option.
Um, when is the next schedule?
And we, and their question was could they talk about
other options as well?
It sounds like at least two
of our counselors may be asking them to,
to kind of go on hold. No, you're not,
I'm not asking them to go on hold.
I'm saying that we continue to have them do their work,
but their work now includes looking at
a different site along with the staff,
along with our architects.
I, I think that we, we expand the scope of the exploration.
Okay. And that would be something
that I just wanna say would be coming up on our
discussion about these orders.
Mm-hmm. Um, okay.
Yeah, Scott
or this jobs with what you kind
of need and et cetera.
When would, when is the next scheduled meeting
of the Mahoney committee,
Um, uh, later this month,
but the design team's coming back
to you based on your request
for more information about APL A one plus plus on March 19th
Council?
Well, I don't think, Okay. Councilor wa excuse me.
I just don't, my personal opinion is, yeah, let's go
with the fire and the safety, uh, fire
and police and talk about that.
Um, I don't want to give up on Mahoney.
Uh, as a one city center, I, I believe that, uh, uh,
that still in my personal opinion should be a public
building and, uh, especially
because of the gym and the theater.
And I think Mahoney still has potential, uh,
for us putting it on the back burner for now
and continue the use that's being used for, for, uh,
basketball and for meetings and stuff like that.
Uh, we're still making use of it until we can figure out
what we're gonna do with it personally.
Looking someplace else for a, uh, another spot
for City Hall right now is not the top of my priority.
So, um, I just think trying to discuss, uh,
fire and police
and then at the same time trying to discuss Mahoney,
I think we need to concentrate so we make sure
that we get police and fire done.
Right. So I I just, we got too many, too many, uh,
sticks in the fire right now
and I just think that we need to take a step back.
Alright. It doesn't sound unless Councilor Coleman
and Councilor Pride feel extremely differently that
I Councilor West, she had her hand up.
Alright. I just want
to establish this evening whether councilors pride
or Coleman object to limiting the discussion
to our safety facilities, our fire
and police facilities this evening.
I'll comment on that. Um, I'm okay with that.
I do want to say one thing about something else
that we potentially were gonna talk about
and just that I am completely behind, um,
making some kind of commitment towards library renovation
or movement at some time this year just so
that we have a plan in place.
'cause I totally agree with the director, you know, if it's,
it's been too long and so I, I wanna see us
to start planning in that direction at the very least, um,
and, and have something concrete.
But other than that I'm happy
to have the discussion be about police and fire.
'cause I agree that those are
the things that we really need.
Oh, okay. Councilor West,
I, I can we agree
that we're gonna ask them a hony committee to go on hold
until we can get back to them with more specific guidance
and direction and we're not ready to do that tonight.
Why don't we get
to our order discussion?
And I think that might get a little
clearer right there. Well, it's
Gonna, Yes.
Okay. I mean I, it just seems like
that will naturally lead us there.
Okay. Counselor Scott,
I maybe to clarify, what I would like to try
and recommend is not necessarily that we postpone it
for like a month, but can it just be a portion
of the discussion in a week or two?
Like just that we talk about police and fire
and then we talk about Mahoney in like a week or two
or three or whenever, you know what I mean?
I I don't wanna postpone it indefinitely. Yes.
I'm just saying like, you know, it is nine 30, let's try
and bite off what we can chew. We separate the
Topics. South
Portland is not lacking in discussion
topics in these times.
Probably we have all noticed that now.
I'm not quite sure what to do with you.
Skip, because I see your hand.
I just wanna add some context to the conversation if
possible if thought.
Yeah. Well I how about just let the,
let the council do their counseling?
If you wouldn't mind With all with no disrespect.
I like what I'm hearing, so thank you. Alright.
Do we have someone who'd like to go
for it on discussing police
or fire, especially fire counselor,
why counselor West?
Well, here I am, I wanna start off
by thanking the staff tonight.
I thought the presentations for the staff were really great
and I'm wanted to say to the community, I am
so excited about the potential for our police station.
I think that's a super location
and I do believe that the voters will get behind it.
I want to say that I will not support rebuilding
of a new fire station on the existing site.
And I'd like to go through the reasons with the council.
We, if we build a new fire, uh,
and I don't wanna change the site,
I just wanna say this isn't the right time to do it.
We can't, and I, I'm really sad
that this city has not maintained its buildings.
And I'm very sad that we haven't had built up a capital fund
for property construction.
I, I mean this council is being put in the most awkward
position because for years, Portland,
south Portland patted itself on the back
as a low tax city when it should have been putting aside
money to replace its facilities and it hasn't done it.
And we're stuck and we're stuck
with a tremendously difficult school budget.
And I think my priorities in the community education
is very, very high.
So, uh, I I feel bad about what I'm saying
because I'm not taking issue with the fact
that we need these things.
I'm just saying how can we, how can we word it?
How can we strike the right balance?
Okay, we've got this fire station, it's inadequate,
we've got a police station, it's inadequate,
but we have taken the initiative to find a great place
for our police station and once our police station moves,
it's gonna free up some space that fire could use.
And I've been asking some questions
and the answers are really interesting answers
and I urge the counsel to look at them
and I actually would really like it if we could put up on
the screen the chart
that showed the two interesting charts tonight were the
calls, well we could just work with that one.
The, the fire calls and that shows the one
and a half mile chief, do you have that, uh,
thing if you can just bring up that one screen.
Yeah, but while he's moving up to do that, I wanna say
I had asked, there's a number
of reasons why this location is not the right location
for the next 75 years.
For the last three years I've been working on the
con the comp plan committee
and we're close to coming to the council with a comp plan.
If you look at where the growth in this city is, where this,
uh, fire station serves
and where they have to get
the location is not a good one.
Yes, because of resiliency and
because of what's gonna happen with, uh, sea level rise,
but also because of the difficulty of getting out, uh,
Broadway over the next period of time,
the watermen intersection is at capacity.
Now there's cottage, there's ocean,
it's a very awkward corridor for those traffic, for those,
um, for those fire engines to go down.
And if you look at the map, the eastern part of our thanks,
that one's really good because what it shows, see
where they see a mile and a half.
And then the, the other one
that's good is your existing circles.
Because what you see, see this, look at this,
the whole eastern part of the city, which I'll be, yes,
I live there does, is not, does not meet the standards
of being in with a mile and a half.
I hope that we will see development in the eastern
waterfront between now and 2040.
All those people out there that don't think
so can just come after me but you.
But the, the fact is, look at there, none of it is served.
How are we gonna get fire engines out there within
the response time?
Look at the Willard, look at LUTs field.
So I think that then, then I'm gonna move on.
What do I think the voters will vote for?
I asked these questions
and I said, what's happened in the last five years
to our fire station and what are the needs?
And this is what they came up with, they said,
and think about this, when we have,
when we empty out the police station, we can take some of
that space in the police station
and devote it to fire needs.
Here are the expenses over the last five years.
It doesn't meet modern code, standards of safety operation
to include a lack of adequate restroom
and shower facilities.
Okay, we'll use some of the ones in the police station.
There's a lack of separation
between the apparatus area and the living space.
Okay? When the police station is empty, we can use some
of the police station, the lack of a sprinkler system,
the lack of decontamination facilities, et cetera.
Then I asked, then they gave me a list of the costs.
And the costs are, and of these, all these different things,
when you add those costs up, it's 1,780,000.
So how can we possibly ask the voters in this time
with the financial constraints that our community is facing
to pay 31
and a half million dollars in construction costs only
for a new fire station?
The prudent thing to do this this November is
to go forward and put a bond measure on the ballot
that's gonna cover our police costs.
Add another two and a half million dollars
to upgrade the fire station.
Recognize that the location
for the fire station doesn't work for the next 75 years.
And that we make take the next 10
or 15 years to figure out some place
that's further along the Broadway corridor
where we could build, uh, a new fire station.
And at that point when it's a more adequate time
to ask the voters to support it, that's where I, that's
where I'm coming from and I may not be in the majority on
the council, but that's the way I'm gonna vote.
Well thank you Counselor West.
A lot of food for thought there. Other counselor.
Counselor Scott.
Um, do you have the con on the slide?
Sorry, can you go to the inundation map?
Thanks. And I just wanted to clarify this.
Um, this is the
3.9 C level rise?
No, This is 8.8. This is, this is the 8.8.
This is from the city's, um, coastal Resilience website.
Okay. 'cause I'm looking at the website
and I have a different 8.8.
Um, but e either way I think, um, I,
I I think I appreciate Natalie's comments about
the costs when, when we went
through the coastal resiliency overlay zone work and,
and one of the questions from the planning department was
what are the types of facilities that should be sort
of thought about in the various different kind of medium,
low, high level risk areas?
And obviously, you know, we are the developers for
and the owners of sort of police and fire.
But I think if, if we weren't, for some reason
my thought was sort of what, why would you ever put those
facilities sort of into those areas?
And I, I think my concern,
and granted we can talk about which colors on which maps,
but my concern is not necessarily about how you,
you can make that specific building and site resilient.
It's that how do you actually get out of that site
and serve either the east
or the west parts of that circle when you're, you know,
75 a hundred years out and,
and the time that you need sort of fire
to be available is the time when, you know, there are sort
of emergencies and, and that sort of scenario.
So I think I, I have similar concerns about the location
for fire in the long run in terms
of building a new a hundred year, um, facility.
Um, so I I am also in favor of sort
of a bond measure this year that,
that builds a new police station,
utilizes the current fire site,
but maybe doesn't go to the extent
of building a fully new facility.
And thinking again in the sort of five year plan in,
in terms of planning in the next five years, thinking about
what a more long-term a hundred plus year location
for a fire station is.
Um, that's my thought
Address some of these.
Sure. Um, would the city manager would like
to say a few things so far about what's
been presented? Yeah,
I, I I think these are important, um, concerns to raise.
The, the one thing I'll say about that flooding is what the,
you know, that's over the next 75 years, high tide,
all these worst case scenarios.
If we don't think the fire station is a good fit there,
what we're saying is we're not gonna do anything about that.
We're gonna let Broadway flood
and we don't care if that part
of the city is disconnected from the other
and that's simply not realistic.
I've talked to our planning director
and he said keeping the fire department there,
we're gonna have to address this flooding anyway
and we're already doing things to do that
and this will just probably hasten the need
to do things there.
So if you think that we're just gonna let Broadway flood
and we're, we're that street's gonna be impassable,
then maybe it does make sense to move Broadway.
But over the next 75 years,
if you think we are gonna take some action to mitigate that,
which which I think the plans call for,
then this still would be a good location
for the fire department.
And it also is important
to remember if we know there's a flooding event coming
and something like this is going to happen,
the chief can strategically place apparatus at different
locations in the city so as to not have
to be impacted by that.
So I I do think that should factor in
before we kind of just say we're,
we're just gonna pause on um, central, uh, you know,
I I do think that should factor in.
I I don't think, I don't think the city's not gonna commit
to making it, making it so that Broadway's gonna flood.
Well Scott, isn't it, that's a main state road, right?
So I mean DOT's coming in to protect that road anyway.
They, they, we, we, they would need some help
but they're, I mean it's something we're looking at.
It's something that's been talked about and addressed.
It's not something that's gonna happen five years from now,
but we've, so we've got some time to address that as well.
We're gonna have to either way whether the
fire station's there or not,
Another cost we can't afford.
Alright, on the topic of, well first of all, I,
we keep saying we're talking about the police station
and the or I keep saying and the fire station.
Um, but at the top of this meeting, um, with,
with the encouragement of the council an executive session,
um, I announced that
unless things change, this council is supportive
of putting in front of the voters a referendum
that would help us move the police station
to cash corner area.
So we've already said that will happen.
So I think that let's just remind
ourselves that's the given.
So really we are simply talking about the fire station.
Um, what would it take,
because I watched the presentation that the chief made
and I always like to hear from the chief, what would it take
to explore the fire station on the property
that is the other half of the Mahoney property?
Say what? It still has that remediation,
soil remediation problem of millions.
Yes. So that's part of what would probably need to happen.
Um, but I, of the, of the choices that the,
our fire chief was saying he had looked at,
he did not recommend going out to Hamlin.
Um, he did recommend mitigating
and sticking with the current site,
but he also didn't say that the world would come
to an end if the fire station was at the Mahoney site.
So what I'm asking for is
what would it take to explore that?
Is it something that's worth doing,
exploring it?
Mayor, for the purposes of a referendum on the,
a bond measure on the November
ballot. I don't think you can do that.
You don't think we would be able to do
It? I mean you can ask the consultants,
but we're getting pretty close to that.
I think you've got a situation choices. It's
True. I keep thinking
that we've got till November,
but we really have till June.
So come on up for just one second.
I think what Counselor West is saying is
that we don't have the time to explore that for the purposes
of a fall referendum.
We, I think we just need
to hear your opinion a bit of it anyway.
Well, the, the, the ask of, um, for example,
um, exploring the police station at
2 79 Main Street, we are
taking all the elements that we planned at Mahoney
and seeing if it fits on the site.
And that move is, we can do that from where we are as long
as the program and elements are the same,
it's the same question for fire.
If we understand the program is the same, it's a relatively
quick study to do a test fit to make sure that it would fit
and how the impact on Mahoney.
So it isn't, um, a whole new site I'd be nervous about,
but we know the Mahoney site,
so it's just doing a program test fit.
Um, so I guess the que if the question is can we do that
and also go to referendum, I would say yes in the timeframe
that we have for Mahoney site, not necessarily a new site.
Okay. Thank you. I think that's helpful.
I hope other folks felt that was helpful.
Um, did you want to say anything?
Chief, did you wanna say that you wanna punch me in the nose
for bringing this up or anything?
Someone with the fire chief only having lived, um,
this process to the point that we're at, um,
I don't know why the public would be supportive
of the fire station going to Mahoney as opposed
to the police station going to Mahoney
for all the reasons. I
Don't want to hear you sirens and I live there
For all the reasons. If you
think PD is loud, uh, you know,
we'll give them a run for their money. So,
So your gut is that it would fail
to win support as a location? Yeah.
My gut is that the alternative sites
that have been presented to me that we know about
that we could acquire, that the place could go
to are probably non stockers.
You know, if we really want to do, um, an absolute best case
location study for Central Fire,
that we place something on the east end of the city
and it turns out to be 50 Market Street,
is this council gonna take 50 Market Street
and put a firehouse there or, or 180 Waterman Drive?
I mean, there is, there are not a lot
of two acre open spaces on the east end of the city
for a fire station to go.
Um, and so to go through that effort is, you know,
probably a lot of, a lot of time spent
for a lot at the end, my opinion.
Thank you. Thank you very much. That's valuable.
Alright, who else has things to say here on this council?
Because so far the only place we really are is
where we started the meeting with.
No, no, we're not. No.
I feel like we've, well, made a lot of progress.
Alright, well then educate me if you're a voter
and you ask what might I see on the referendum, according
to this council, what are you, it's the answer.
I think we have a solid police and fire plan
and a commitment to work towards Mahoney
and or together, separately library.
So for you, the fire plan, you're in some disagreement
with Councilor West, the fire plan for you?
I think I'm probably a disagreement with the Chief West
to everybody, but I'm happy to go along with the will
of the council because I know
that a lot of work has gone into this. So,
But seriously, I,
and also Carter, if you don't feel like answering right this
moment, you don't have to be put on the spot.
But I, I, counselor West prefers that.
I think I'm going to say this correctly, Natalie,
that we have the fire,
or excuse me, the police station is a given
and that perhaps we're asking voters for another 2 million
or so is what I've heard you say
to do some renovations at the then empty police station
to accommodate the fire, the firefighters.
Can I, can we hear what the bond measure amount would be
for the fi for the police station?
Because we have the construction cost
for the police station, just a construction of 27.6 million.
But what's the thinking of that?
The whatever the soft costs are, the cost of issuance.
What, what's our bond measure
that we're talking about right now?
And then I ask the council to put your community,
your thumb on the pulse of the community
and what have you been hearing?
Um, okay,
Well while they're looking, I know we don't maybe have a
number exactly, but I think my thought around limiting
the fire renovation is that I just don't know if
that is the right spot for fire.
And I wonder if that's just an easier number, is more
of a renovation of fire keeping the building too.
'cause we love that building. So anyway,
but it's clear as much to me, at least I,
Well, I, I Fire
Madam Mayor. I think that
if you went with a Go ahead.
No, go, go, Go. I think if you went with a fire
and a, uh, police referendum,
you put 'em together, not quite sure if it would
pass or not, but mm-hmm.
If you went to a two question,
then you're pitting fire against, you know, two mm-hmm.
Public safeties against each other. Um, so
It's, It's a tough one.
I, I understand what Natalie's saying as well, you know, go
with the, uh, police because we kind
of have a place 80 million,
but, uh, the, uh, place
where the fire department is questionable in some
of the counselor's minds
and just putting some money at it to hold us over
until we can figure out what we're really gonna do.
So I'm not quite sure yet, so I'm really not ready to.
Okay. Well I think you're in the majority, unfortunately.
Counselor Pride, any urge to speak
The number? Ask him for,
yeah. What's the, do we have the number for,
uh, do we have the number for the bomb? Oh,
Sorry. Council Walker
has a question. I'm sorry, I have to get
Back to you. It's just a procedural
question for you.
If after we hear the number No, you don't have to move.
After we hear the number, can we have the chief come up
and respond to Natalie's
or Counselor West's suggestion, like,
as whether this is a feasible thing, whether this is a thing
that, that the city would have an appetite for.
Because I understand what you're saying in terms
of the voters and the taxpayers, I understand that,
but I also want to hear from the experts who have to live
and work and do this every day.
So I'm just asking if we could do that after,
If the chief is comfortable doing that.
Yes. Alright.
So we're waiting for a number of, I myself have lost track.
Don Hopkins Hopkins, director of facility.
So a new police station would be about 47 million
as we're looking at it now.
And, uh, total project with police
and fire, we'd be at about an $87 million bond.
That's the numbers. Now,
once we get into schematic design, that'll probably come down.
I think we'd be closer to 80 million.
But, um, Craig doesn't want me to say that right now.
Um, I'd also, I'd also like to speak, uh, on, uh,
council West's, um, of using PD to get fired
by, uh, the police station.
I did, uh, I put capital in for police
and fire this year, about $5.4 million in capital in order
to take care of a bunch of things.
We have sewage coming up in the, the first floor
of the police station about once a week.
We have to have zoom drain over there.
There's officers walking around in sewage every week.
The basements are flooded out almost every week as well.
We have to, we have to do water remediation.
So in order to put fire to house fire
and pd, once they moved out, that building would've
to have more than, uh, the $2 million that was discussed.
I'm not sure we got that number,
but those, um, it would be significantly more than that.
Um, the fire station itself,
the facades falling off the roof needs to be replaced.
Uh, it has no sprinkler system, so on and so forth.
Same with the fire station.
So, um, I would say more like five to 10 million.
We could probably get them by for a few years there,
but it seems like a waste of money for me. But
Dawn, how did our facilities get this bad
Lack of attention? Uh,
you know, I've been with the city for,
for five, five years.
Um, I was the first director of facilities
that the city brought on.
So basically all the different departments were
taking care of their buildings.
There was no, uh, capital planning.
There was no, um, you know, preventive maintenance.
A lot of the preventive maintenance wouldn't be being done.
Um, so some of these newer buildings that we have, such
as cash corner, municipal service facilities, we are,
you know, we are on top of all the preventive maintenance,
which then cuts down your, I mean,
cuts down your reactive maintenance as well
as gives you longer life for all those components.
Um, the, the central fire station never had any
of those components anyways.
There's no central air in there, there's no, you know,
it's got a boiler for heat, no sprinklers, no fire system.
It's got no, uh, no contamination decontamination.
It's got nothing between the, the bays.
So all the firemen are upstairs sleeping in,
in contaminated air and, and so on and so forth.
So, uh, we could, uh, I like the idea
of maybe putting them into pd,
but it's gonna be considerable more money to, to bring
that building up to, to a standard
where they could actually house people in that building.
Um, right now we, we have a tough time with just, you know,
having day-to-day operations in there with police.
So
If you would like to respond, we all also know that
what you recommended is the plan as it was,
but if you'd like to respond to this new idea.
Yeah. Phil Reed,
what exactly do you want me to respond to?
My, my, my request was to see if that,
if you could share your thoughts about Councilor West's idea
of moving the Living Living
Bathing Quarters.
Okay. Yeah, no, I mean, I think I, I,
I appreciate the idea
and I, you know, out of the box thinking, awesome.
But I mean, I think from a practical standpoint,
it's good money after bad.
Thank you. Can I just add too, counselor, I,
it seemed like through this whole process,
central Fire was never an issue at this location.
We had talked about flooding before.
That's nothing new here.
Um, the, the fact that, you know, the proposal,
which I hate calls for a whole new facility
and can't, you know, save the facade.
I didn't love hearing that news,
but it, none of this seemed to be an issue up
until a meeting or two ago when something came up.
So I don't know what changed,
but I agree, I don't, so I don't, it's,
it's a little confusing to me even why we're talking about
not even maybe moving forward
with Central Fire at this location now. So
Scott, I'm the new kid.
Come on.
Could I just respond to that?
Because Yes, I,
because I asked in writing,
I asked in writing about the response times
and the information we got shows that the eastern part
of the city does not fall within the
appropriate response times.
Moreover, the number we got is that the meeting,
the applicable standards is about 60%.
And when you look in their own memo, the goal should be 90%.
So we have a very serious question for the long term
about whether we can meet the needs of the eastern part
of our community with a fire station at that location,
particularly because all the data for future development
of the city after working on the comp plan for three years,
shows that those intersections are gonna continue
to be much more crowded and congested than they are now.
So I think it's very clear
that the facts do not support the next 75 years having a
fire station in that location.
So that presumes, we're not gonna be using fire trucks on
Broadway then if those intersections are clogged, right?
I mean, they're gonna have to use back streets. I,
I don't know. Well, they're gonna have to
be special.
You'll have to have the transit, the kind of quick transit
where you can stop everything
and move through. But it's been, we do,
I mean, I, I I think, I think to admit
that we're gonna abandon the EastWest quarter in the city
is preposterous.
We, this council voted against making an East west
corridor not too long ago.
So all you got is Broadway. That's it.
I mean, I don't know what else you got.
So to say that we are gonna abandon that road,
I think is not something to consider.
So your point about our response time,
there is another option.
We can add another fire station
with more staff all the time,
but that's gonna cost you even more.
So, I mean, we do absolutely the best that we can do,
and I think you're misinterpreting what I'm saying.
We, we meet that standard 60% of the time, given the fact
that a, a vast proportion of the calls that we go on,
I make them drive with traffic.
They do not use their lights and sirens.
I won't let them do it.
When it is a high acuity call, we meet the standard.
Okay, well, we are all learning
tonight. Councilor Walker,
Just in terms of maybe bringing us in line
with the decision, maybe we should break the conversation
down by, by question and get a consensus from everybody.
You know, do you agree with X for one or no?
And then move on to number two and number three
and number four to keep us clear
and moving forward efficiently.
I like that idea. I don't see anyone else
protesting that idea.
I appreciate your facilitative skills, counselor Walker.
Maybe we should begin with number one, does council wish
to continue with the planned construction
of a new central fire station on site?
We are not voting on this into eternity.
We are trying to get the will of the council right now
to help us move forward.
So Counselor Pride, are you volunteering to go first?
I'm volunteering to go first.
I think we've heard a lot of stuff from everyone,
and I, I appreciate the conversation.
I think that's what workshops are for.
I mean, constructive conversation.
Um, and a lot of information
has been contained in just everything everyone's saying.
Um, and so I sort of, it's hard.
Um, I find myself in sort of the unenviable position of,
of disagreeing with Councillor West.
I think. I think we're, I think we're in a position where,
you know, it's funny because,
and I'm, I remembered as we were having this conversation
when we were talking about Mahoney a long time ago,
and I called, I called Scott
and I said, Hey, what about the library?
Why couldn't we put the police station at the library?
And he disagreed, but that, for some reason
that was not a good idea.
I don't remember bad corner or whatever.
And that's what got the,
the library moved to Mahoney though.
Like, that's, that's where that came from.
And now, you know, what if we just had the library and,
and the, uh, and the fire station, trade buildings
or trade locations, I don't know.
But that, that, uh, I don't think is sort
of realistic at this point.
Um, and I think we need to go in a direction.
I think that, um, you know,
I hear what Councilor West is saying,
but I think that this is what we've got.
And I also think that ultimately, um,
I also hear very clearly what, um,
Councillor Matthews said about having police
com compete with fire.
So I think I'd, I'd rather move forward
with the fire where it is.
Um, you know, I, that that,
that conversation we had earlier tonight about, um,
historic preservation also hits me hard here.
And so as much as I want to see, I, I would like
to see some kind of plan that
keep some elements of what exists there now,
at least in facade,
even if it's a new building, but it looks the same.
But I'd rather see some elements
of whatever's there really kept.
I'd like to see some historic preservation.
It's hard for me to say that.
And one of the reasons I I, I love that fire station.
Oh my goodness. I, when, when it, uh,
'cause I drive by it every single
morning and every single night.
And when like Christmas comes
and the lights are green red, green red,
and the star is up on the I, uh,
it just gets me into nostalgia really hard.
Um, I love it. And so it's hard for me to see that go.
Um, but I also, I think in the last couple years,
we've just keenly felt the tax burden
just get outta control.
Um, and I really feel like it's hard to go to the taxpayers
with something that's gonna put
some of them out of their houses.
Some people are gonna be voting against any bond issue
because they believe that they're not
gonna be able to afford their taxes.
And so, I I, as much as I want historical preservation,
I think it's more like build something that keeps some
of the historical elements, the,
the character of that building.
But it's probably gotta be new
'cause it's gonna be cheaper to do it that way than it is
to really just sort of keep it where it is.
So take for me what you will there, but that's okay.
I, I am in favor of moving forward with it on the,
the answer is yes to that question.
Okay. And then just, are you seeing then a bond
that is called, you know, the, the police
and fire safety bond in which we are asking voters to vote
for an entire cost?
Or are you seeing a split in which voters could weigh in a
I think you're skipping to question four. If
We're going through this One question at time.
Well, nevermind. But it's because
you did start to talk about that.
You're right. Okay. Who wants to go next on question one
and question one only?
Councilor Walker? Yes. Yes. Okay.
Counselor Walker wishes to continue
with the plan construction of a new central fire
station on site.
Nice. Thanks Counselor. Scott, I,
I think I'm there. I think we,
we have to move forward.
There's been a lot of work done and I, I just,
I'm there. Yes.
So count. Oh, come on. No. Hi. There's a yes,
There's move on.
Yes. Yes. No
Highfiving though. Yes. Count.
There's a yes from Counselor Coleman. Counselor Matthews.
I thought we only saved these late night
discussions for dogs. Yeah,
We, we can.
I just said that out loud too. Yeah.
Anyway, uh, I I just think that, uh, you know,
this is a situation.
Yes. I, I want to just keep it there
and worry about Broadway when we get to it.
We'll be dead. Oh gosh.
I actually was thinking that, but I didn't say it.
Wait, counselors. Oh, my, my mind.
Speak for yourself. Um,
Yes, yes. I know.
I, but I'm mute. I don't mind.
I mean, I made my reasons clear.
Well, I thought that the reasons that you gave us,
and it also, it doesn't really matter
what I think at this point, but, um, the reasons
and the care that you've taken
to do the research Counselor West, I admire that.
And, um, I appreciate you bringing the information.
I think I appreciate it also that the chief clarified some
of the finer points of response times and et cetera.
So I did appreciate that.
Um, you know, when I look at the inundation maps
and then when I think of, ooh, maybe there'd be a way
to preserve the historic thing,
and then we could put it somewhere else.
Um, I, I say, well, maybe it's not a great site,
but we can't invent space somewhere else in the
eastern part of the city.
There doesn't seem to be anything better.
I thought I had a chance there when Craig Piper said, yes,
we could explore Mahoney in time for the referendum.
But then I had one counselor
and the chief say, yeah, way
to the residents, get wind of that.
That's not gonna work too well.
So at this point, I think I am forced to say yes,
that I think that the new, that the current site is
what we need to explore.
And that was question one. Can we go to question two?
Is council okay.
With staff proceeding with a bond referendum
for public safety facilities for November, 2026?
Um, I think it would be up to us to define what
that bond referendum is.
We have a hand Councilor Walker.
Yes. Sorry. Who? What?
Councilor Walker is a Yes. The council is okay.
With a bond referendum not yet defined. Yes.
Um, question four. Yes. I'm a yes.
You're a yes on a bond referendum. All right.
Is there anybody who's a no on a bond referendum? Nope.
All right. So this council believes some type
of bond referendum for public safety facilities should go
to the voters in November.
Do, can you scroll the, so we can see the questions?
Hold the board. Oh, point at each other.
Scott Point. I
Can only click on the item since the position paper is
so long it needs to be scrolled on.
Yeah. The presentation screen.
Scott, we're at two now. No, no, we're actually at three.
We're actually three. We're at three now. There we go.
This that's three. It is very touching know.
Yeah, we're gonna can't wait
to get an even better software system than this
one. We're still
So by answering Yes.
What you doing, Scott? Every time you touch it,
it just stop.
Yay. Well done. Three.
It just wants to go back to, it doesn't let you stay.
Alright, well I Will, lemme just see if I can hold it.
If I hold it, maybe it won't go.
Um, I will say that in answering two, we did not define
what a bond referendum is,
but if it's the will of counsel that we're going
to three, I guess I do that.
Yes. Um, can city staff
and the design team begin looking at other locations
for combined City Hall slash Hamlin in addition
to proceeding with looking at the A one plus plus option
council agreed upon earlier in February?
No. Okay. We've got gotta know.
Um, councilor WA West?
No. Are we going in order?
Do you wanna get reasons or just gonna, if you want, say,
if you wanna say reasons, I think you should.
Yeah, well, so, uh, yeah, I, I thought
that this was the part of the discussion
that we were gonna have.
I think it's within the orders. Some well
Next time Yeah.
Position I thought we were trying to keep to the next time.
I think if we want to skip to question four, that's
Okay. Okay, fine.
Which real quickly is quick. Read it quick, quick.
Is the council open to a split referendum?
Such as, but not limited to the following,
Do we? Which clearly
you are.
You just don't know what the non-public safety
half is gonna go.
It just, it defaults coming back.
Great program. Yeah, it's terrific.
Okay, so we said that we want to do a referendum.
I believe we're open to a split.
Do we have the strength, energy,
and information to decide what that split looks like?
Counselor West,
One suggestion would be to pick up on the
school grass fields thing that we voted on
and have what the council has said tonight, that 87 million
or whatever for both a new fire and police
and something lower than that for a police with two
and a half million for fire.
Can I don't Support that.
Yeah, I That's fine. Whatever.
It's an all or nothing, then it all goes down.
But just an idea.
Well, I mean, one all, one way of doing it would be
vote for fire station.
Vote for police station, vote for both. Vote for none.
I mean, that is something also,
but that sounds a little bit like we're possibly not going
to get to where we need to get to Council or Pride.
I think that we should be having
the public safety be a single bond.
Um, I think it's an all or nothing.
I think people need to choose to support this or, or not.
And I, I don't know that, look, I, I think the problem
with putting it, putting it like another option out there
that is, um, let's spend a less on the fire
so we can limp along.
And what we have now is that that just seems like, you know,
people, it, it's an attractive option for a lot of people,
but I don't think that everybody is watching these meetings.
Like we are paying attention very closely to the fact that
that limping along thing
may seem really attractive to a lot of people.
But if they really knew
what limping along looked like in a facility that needs
to have remediation done, so it doesn't, you know, fill up,
sew with sewage, um, they, they will, they, if they knew all
that, they probably would vote, you know,
for the whole hog project.
But I think we just sort of make that decision for them.
Alright, so it, my understanding is
that the hog at this point is 87 million
and potentially there would be ways to figure out if
that could get a little tweaked down.
Well, wait, isn't that, wasn't that just the police? No.
Or 87 was both false. Okay. Yes. Um, yeah.
Okay. Did you wanna say something? Counselor Matthews,
I'm just concerned at 87 million whether we can get,
we can get the voters behind it.
Especially because again, I try to tell people
to look at the big picture.
We need to look at the rate hikes with, uh, you know, uh,
the Pearl Street pump station.
We just heard the chairman of the Board
of Education stand up there
and say that they need to find $7 million.
I have no idea. It's more like eight, $8 million and, uh,
and hoping to get the 6%.
So I would like to say
that I publicly said 3%,
but she's saying 6% they, they're hoping to get to,
that's a significant increase in your taxes alone.
So, yeah.
You know, I guess we leave it up to the voters as the, uh,
gentleman back there and the suspenders said last week.
You know, throw it to the voters and, and see what they say.
So.
And one question or two,
One, I don't want to pit fire
against the police department. Yeah, that's
Not a good idea.
Um, councilor West, did you wanna respond
or have you already I'm beginning to lose track.
No, just that it should be one. Okay. Should be one measure.
Thank you. Anyone? Just one? Yes. Okay.
So at this point, are you noting these fun things? Scott?
We're having a council that at this point in this moment,
anybody is recommending a bond
for public safety be on the ballot in November.
Alright, is that the end of our questions? Yes. For tonight.
For this For tonight topic.
Alright then if we're prepared to say we've done
what we could do for this workshop,
I think we wanna say the workshop part
of the evening is over and move on
to action on old and new business.
Does that work for everybody? Mm-hmm. Everybody. Everybody.
Thank you. Let's do that.
Madam Clerk, could you please read order 1 55 25 26
Order? 1 55 26.
25 26 amending order number 34 24 25.
Who many eliminate reference.
So the library being part
of the Mahoney project passage requires majority vote.
Sorry, can I move the date? I'm not gonna vote.
Okay, so, oh no, this is not, did you want
to say anything about the position, Scott?
Yeah, sure. So, um,
September 24 council approved the order that
among other things included the new public library
and the redevelopment of the Mahoney school property.
However, when you talked about, um, uh,
when you heard the news about the $149 million price tag
back in January and a subsequent discussion last month,
guidance was given at that time to staff
and the design team
to exclude the library from the redesign
process for Mahoney.
So the a plus plus was not gonna be part of it.
So in order to, that was just guidance though.
You have to, in order for this to be an actual action
and to change prior, prior direction, um, you would need
to amend that order, um,
to essentially eliminate the library from consideration
for the Mahoney school property redevelopment.
Otherwise it would still be something
Considered. Yes.
I mean, I would think that we would move
to suspend this vote until we are discussing Mahoney.
I mean, it's very hard for us to make this decision.
You know what I'm saying? I would agree with that Ma.
I'm wondering about that. Alright. And four.
So Jen, we have a motion for postponement or
Motion to postpone.
Okay.
Yes. And Seconded. Second. All three of these orders,
All three of them, they all Do with Mahoney.
They all have to do with Mahoney.
Well the, but the third one is just police out of Mahoney.
Hold on. I'm looking at them again.
Staff would be fine. Locations suspended,
But That one should be
A repeal, not an, okay.
So on the on motion for passage of number three, that's
to direct staff and the design team to seek
locations other than Mahoney for a new police station.
We've announced that we are set on a location.
So we need to repeal this.
Well, I don't know that we need to repeal it. I,
It's been accomplished. I
Don't, it's like we've done it already.
So what do we need to do to it? You
Just repeal order
1, 5, 7 25, 26 or 24?
No, 1, 3, 4. Sorry.
If we amended it, we would be directing the staff Go out,
look for other locations, right?
Yes. And you decided on one,
but if this for something of some reason, this falls
through, do you want us to continue to look it it?
If you want to skip it, you can.
It was more before we had certainty.
Alright. I, I think, I think the council, the mood
of the council seems to be skipping. Yep.
Yes. So on the table right
Now you have a motion to postpone order 1 53.
So, but it sounded like Natalie was making it a motion
to preserve to all of them.
You can Kids folks, countrymen.
Um, I'm just looking at the rest of them real quickly.
Okay. So Natalie
or Dick, one of you was making the motion
that originally seemed to be only going to the first one,
but then someone tried to sneak in
that it would be for all of them.
Is it for all of them? 'cause that could make sense.
Well, I'm sorry you
are we postponing all three?
Postponing all three? Sure.
Okay. Neither
One of you. I don't think
This is what happens when you make
how meetings go this long. You think
I don't do it?
Hello South Portland. It's not me doing this.
It's all of us. We're all in this together.
We got a lot of, oops, we got a lot of stuff going on.
Um, alright. I don't think
either one of you have to explain.
Do we need to discuss, are we ready to vote? Hello?
Does anybody understand what we're voting for?
The motion to postpone indefinitely? All of those orders?
Not, definitely not. I'm sorry. Indefinitely, forever.
When did what? There was just a motion to post pony orders.
There was no dates or so is there a date Certain?
Yes. And I wonder if we could have a date.
Certain, when are we gonna discuss Mahoney?
Because we should have it on every council agenda
Our next week, which is on Tuesday already.
We have a very full agenda.
So I don't see it happening then.
So I think it's an early April business meeting. Not 19th.
We have March. March Business meeting. Okay. Yep.
Yep. They were already planning on coming
to talk about the a plus plus results.
Alright, well then that's when I will be
so postponed to March 19.
Yep. Alright. We have Did you get all that? Yes ma'am. Yes.
Thank you. Oh, you were so ahead of me at all times.
Alright, to postpone to March 19. All in favor?
That is a unanimous vote of our council. Wow. Thank you.
Anything else to, oh, we have
to do citizen discussion part two or do we?
Alright. Yes we do. Yes we do.
Um, is there anyone who would like to make a public comment
about an item on or off the agenda?
Oh, good. See, no one public comment is closed. Thank you.
Communication from the city manager.
I'm gonna skip it All. Councilors round robin.
Tweet, tweet, tweet. No. Yes. Any round robins?
I'll pass and pass. Alright.
Can we have a motion to adjourn? I'll move to adjourn.
Seconded. All in favor. Thank you.
And thank you members of the community.